In this paper , the results of mercury concentrations in two abiotic compartments ( river water and suspended particles ) and two biotic compartments ( fish and human hair ) from the upper Madeira rivers of the Bolivian Amazon basin are presented .
Because of the local hydrological regimes and a high deposition rate in the plain , due to the presence of a subsidence zone at the bottom of the Andean piedmont , in the dry season , the highest mercury concentrations and fluxes were not found in rivers where mining activities took place ( 2.25-6.99 ng l(-1) ; and 1.07-8.67 mg Hg d(-1) km(-2) ) , but at the outlet of the Andean basins exploited for their alluvial gold ( 7.22-8.22 ng l(-1) ; and 9.47-9.52 mg Hg d(-1) km(-2) ) .
The total mercury concentrations measured in surface waters of the upper Beni basin varied during the dry season , from 2.24 to 2.57 ng l(-1) in the glacial waters of the Zongo river , to 7.00 ng l(-1) in the Madeira River at Porto Velho and 9.49-10.86 ng l(-1) at its confluence with the Amazon .
The results obtained from fish indicate , on one hand , that 86% of the piscivorous fishes collected in the Beni river were contaminated , and , on the other hand , their high mercury concentrations could exceed by almost four times the WHO ( 1976 ) safety limit .
In the Beni River , the mercury concentrations found in omnivorous and mud-feeding fish ranged from 0.02 to 0.19 microg g(-1) ( wet wt. ) , and in piscivorous fish , from 0.33 to 2.30 microg Hg g(-1) ( wet wt. ) .
The mercury accumulated by carnivorous fishes was mainly present in its organic form ; methylmercury represented 73-98% of the total mercury analysed .
Eighty persons were studied in the entire Bolivian Amazonian basin .
Unlike the gold miners , who are more affected by tropical diseases , such as malaria and yellow fever , the indigenous people living on the banks of the Beni river , present elevated levels of mercury ( 9.81 microg g(-1) on average ) .
We observed an increase in contamination in young children still being breast-fed , confirming that hair mercury concentration in babies was significantly affected by maternal mercury contamination during pregnancy .
These results show that the major health impacts caused by mercury affect people who are not working directly in gold mining activities but who have a regular fish diet .
