Artisanal gold-mining activities in the Philippines have proliferated since the early 1980s .
Presently , environmental and health monitoring conducted by several governmental agencies is limited to the determination of total mercury only .
Previous studies undertaken focused mainly on the exposure of adults and workers to mercury during mining/processing operations .
However , in one area in Mindanao , mined ores are brought down and processed in the lowlands where residential communities are exposed to environmental pollutants resulting from gold processing/refining operations .
The area of study is Apokon , Tagum , Davao del Norte , which has 29 gold processing and refining plants .
Health complaints among schoolchildren in Apokon Elementary School were received by the Department of Health and were attributed to the mercury pollution in the environment .
As part of a collaboration with the Health Department , UP-National Poisons Control and Information Service , the National Institute for Minamata Disease ( NIMD ) , Japan , provided technical assistance in the analytical determination of mercury in biological and environmental samples .
Elevated mercury concentrations were noted in some of the river systems up to 15 km from the mining areas .
Environmental quality monitoring showed T-Hg sediment levels ranged from 0.553 to 66.471 microg/g dry wt. while water samples from river systems exhibited mercury levels from 72.8 to 78.4 ng/ml .
Twenty-seven sediment samples from river systems near mining operations and seven water samples were also brought to the Institute for analysis .
Fish samples collected showed levels ranging from 1.07 to 438.8 ng/g for total mercury and 0.71-377.18 ng/g for methylmercury .
Methylmercury content in fish is predominant .
All water and sediment samples collected from three sampling sites have elevated T-Hg level while three fish species have elevated T-Hg and methylmercury levels ( WHO/CDC , 1994 ) .
Blood and hair samples from 162 schoolchildren aged 5-17 years were collected and analyzed at the NIMD for mercury analysis .
Analytical procedures used in the NIMD for mercury testing were applied .
Laboratory results showed that total mercury hair samples ranged from 0.278 to 20.393 microg/g while methylmercury hair results were from 0.191 to 18.469 microg/g .
Methylmercury in hair showed levels from 45.96 to 99.81% .
Total blood mercury levels ranged from 0.757 to 56.88 microg/l while Me-Hg blood levels ranged from 1.36 to 46.73 microg/l .
It was determined that 10 children had elevated T-Hg blood levels while one child had high total and methylmercury levels in hair .
A summary of physical examination results showed that the predominant findings include under-height , gingival discoloration , adenopathy , underweight and dermatologic abnormalities among children examined .
