Several studies in the Amazonian Basin have shown that riverine populations are exposed to methylmercury through fish consumption .
It has been suggested that seasonal variations in hair mercury observed through sequential analyses may be related to the changes in fish species ingested by the local communities .
The aim of the present study was to investigate the relationship between fish-eating practices and seasonal variation in mercury exposure .
A group of 36 women from a village located on the banks of the Tapajós River , a major tributary of the Amazon , comprised the present study population .
An interview-administered questionnaire was used to gather information on socio-demographic characteristics , fish-eating practices and other relevant information .
The women also provided hair samples of at least 24 cm in length for mercury analysis .
Hair total and inorganic mercury concentration was measured using a cold vapor atomic absorption analytical method .
Trigonometric regression analysis was done to assess the seasonal variation of total mercury levels .
Variations in inorganic mercury were examined by repeated measures analysis of variance , and analysis of contrast variable with a polynomial transformation .
The results showed that hair mercury levels varied with the season .
Higher levels were observed in months corresponding to the dry season , with lower levels in the rainy season .
Herbivorous fish predominated the diet for 47.2% of the women during the dry season , but this rose to 72.2% during the rainy season .
Those who reported eating fish daily had higher mercury levels in hair compared to those who only ate fish a few times per week .
Retrospective mercury analyses , evaluated by the quantity of mercury present in each centimeter of hair , indicate that mean mercury level of the population decreased over the 2 years prior to the study .
The percentage of inorganic mercury over the total mercury in hair increased towards the extremities of the hair strand .
Higher percentages of inorganic mercury were found for the group who ate more fish ( on a daily consumption basis ) .
These results support the assumption that there are seasonal variations in methylmercury exposure and also a relationship between type of fish species consumed and the resulting hair mercury levels .
