In 1994 , the French National Public Health Network reported significant mercury exposure of native Amerindians in French Guiana .
In 1997 , a study was conducted in the Wayana community to quantify the dietary intake and to identify the fish species contributing the most to the contamination .
The study was completed by an impregnation analysis based on Hg determination in hair samples .
The methodology used was a detailed familial dietary study associated with Hg measurements in fish and some game .
The study was conducted over 7 days in two different seasons in the four most populated Wayana villages on the upper part of the Maroni River ( 521 people ; 70% of the Wayana population in French Guiana ) .
Analysis was based on data on consumption obtained from 165 people in a 1-14 day period ( i.e. , 940 persons [ times ] days ) and involved 270 fish samples from 48 species .
Total Hg and monomethylmercury ( MMHg ) were also determined in hair samples ( 235 samples for total Hg ) .
The results confirm mercury exposure of the Wayana population related to a diet rich in fish , which are relatively highly contaminated for certain species ( up to 1.62 mg/kg fresh weight or 8.1 mg/kg dry weight in skeletal muscle ) .
Results from hair samples showed that 57% of the Amerindians had Hg levels above the World Health Organization ( WHO ) safety limit ( 10 microg/g ) ; all those over 1 year of age had a Hg intake greater than the WHO safety limit ( 200 microg MMHg/week for a 60-kg male ) .
Hg concentrations in fish muscle were closely linked to the feeding regime and position of fish in the food webs .
Overall , 14.5% of the fish collected exceeded the 0.5 mg/kg ( fresh weight ) safety limit .
Four carnivorous species accounted for no less than 72% of the metal ingested by the Wayana families , although these represented only 28% of the consumed fish biomass .
In conclusion , this study revealed excessive exposure to mercury in the Wayana population in French Guiana related to the consumption of contaminated fish .
