Forest pesticide applicators constitute a unique pesticide use group .
Aerial , mechanical-ground , and focal weed control by application of herbicides , in particular chlorophenoxy herbicides , yield diverse exposure scenarios .
In the present work , we analyzed aberrations in G-banded chromosomes , reproductive hormone levels , and polymerase chain reaction-based V(D)J rearrangement frequencies in applicators whose exposures were mostly limited to chlorophenoxy herbicides .
Data from appliers where chlorophenoxy use was less frequent were also examined .
The biomarker outcome data were compared to urinary levels of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid ( 2,4-D ) obtained at the time of maximum 2,4-D use .
Further comparisons of outcome data were made to the total volume of herbicides applied during the entire pesticide-use season.Twenty-four applicators and 15 minimally exposed foresters ( control ) subjects were studied .
Categorized by applicator method , men who used a hand-held , backpack sprayer in their applications showed the highest average level ( 453.6 ppb ) of 2,4-D in urine .
Serum luteinizing hormone ( LH ) values were correlated with urinary 2,4-D levels , but follicle-stimulating hormone and free and total testosterone were not .
At the height of the application season ; 6/7 backpack sprayers , 3/4 applicators who used multinozzle mechanical ( boom ) sprayers , 4/8 aerial applicators , and 2/5 skidder-radiarc ( closed cab ) appliers had two or more V(D)J region rearrangements per microgram of DNA .
Only 5 of 15 minimally exposed ( control ) foresters had two or more rearrangements , and 3 of these 5 subjects demonstrated detectable levels of 2,4-D in the urine .
Only 8/24 DNA samples obtained from the exposed group 10 months or more after their last chlorophenoxy use had two rearrangements per microgram of DNA , suggesting that the exposure-related effects observed were reversible and temporary .
Although urinary 2,4-D levels were not correlated with chromosome aberration frequency , chromosome aberration frequencies were correlated with the total volume of herbicides applied , including products other than 2,4-D .
In summary , herbicide applicators with high urinary levels of 2,4-D ( backpack and boom spray applications ) exhibited elevated LH levels .
They also exhibited altered genomic stability as measured by V(D)J rearrangement frequency , which appears reversible months after peak exposure .
Though highly detailed , the limited sample size warrants cautious interpretation of the data .
