In a trial to assess the exposure of subjects in the pediatric age group to cadmium ( Cd ) pollution , serum Cd was estimated by atomic absorption spectrometry in 405 subjects , birth-18 years old , from Cairo City and its suburbs .
Serum Cd mean concentrations were : 0.92 microg/l in 32 neonates ( birth-4 weeks ) ; 1.33 microg/l in 70 infants ( 4 weeks-2 years ) ; 1.11 microg/l in 100 children in the preschool period ( 2-6 years ) ; 1.34 microg/l in 103 primary school children ( 6-12 years ) ; and 1.24 microg/l in 100 adolescents ( 12-18 years ) .
In neonates , serum Cd was higher in babies with weights and heights that remained below the 5th percentile for age .
Breast-fed infants had a serum Cd geometric mean level ( 1.25 microg/l ) that was not in accordance to that of their mothers ' milk ( 0.52 microg/l , P < 0.001 ) , suggesting alternative routes of exposure .
Environmental tobacco-smoke exposure was the most important determinant of Cd status in the school-aged children , the geometric mean being 1.42 microg/l in passive smokers vs. 1.2 microg/l in non-exposed children ( P < 0.05 ) .
Moreover , adolescents who were active smokers had a significantly higher serum Cd level ( 1.7 microg/l ) as compared to non-smokers ( 1.2 microg/l ) .
Gender did influence the Cd status in adolescents , being higher among males , probably related to smoking , or to the difference in lifestyle of adolescents according to gender in the community .
Alpha-1-microglobulinuria was accompanied by a higher serum Cd concentration in the group of adolescents only , suggesting a subclinical renal effect after several years of cumulative exposure .
The residential classification , whether urban or suburban , did not influence the serum Cd status ; neither did the present or past history of bronchial asthma .
These findings certainly justify further evaluation of the problem of Cd pollution among Cairene individuals , knowing the long-term consequences of exposure to it .
Systematic efforts for the proper disposal of Cd wastes and prevention of smoking in public places are recommended .
