Data on possible acute effects of today's relevant low-level exposure to toluene are contradictory , and information on possible effects of exposure under occupational conditions is largely lacking .
In a controlled , multi-center , blinded field trial , effects possibly associated with acute toluene exposure were evaluated in workers of 12 German rotogravure factories .
Medical examinations ( inquiries on subjective symptoms , and standard tests of psycho-physiological and psycho-motor functions ) were performed on almost 1500 volunteers , of whom 1290 were toluene-exposed ( 1178 men and 112 women ) , and about 200 participants served as references ( 157 men and 37 women ) , but the main aim of the trial was to reveal dose-response relationships .
All volunteers were of the morning work-shift ( 6 h exposure ) .
Both individual ambient air concentrations ( time-weighted average ) during the work-shift , as well as blood toluene concentrations after the work-shift were measured .
Therefore , the medical data could for the first time be correlated with the actual individual body burden ( blood toluene level ) at the time of testing .
In order to largely exclude confounding by chronic toluene exposure , kinetic measurements as well as the psycho-physiological and psycho-motoric tests were performed before and after the work-shift .
Except for minor statistical deviations , neither convincing dose-dependent acute effects could be demonstrated with regression analyses in male volunteers at the exposure levels evaluated , nor were significant differences found when applying group statistics ( highly toluene-exposed group versus volunteers with negligible exposure ) .
Due to the rather large number of participants , the predictive power of the study is high , especially when compared with previous publications .
In two psycho-physiological tests , a few more female volunteers with quite low toluene body burdens ( <340 microg/l blood ) showed relatively low scores when compared with participants of the reference group .
Although evidence for a medical relevance is meager , the small numbers of participants , in both the exposure and the reference groups , hamper a reliable interpretation of the results concerning exposure levels above 85 microg toluene/l blood , and it is difficult to take confounding factors adequately into account .
For the end points evaluated and under occupational conditions , neither blood toluene levels of 850 to 1700 microg/l ( in the highest exposure group [ EXPO-IV ] with 56 participants ) , as measured 1/2 ( +/-1/2 ) h after the work-shift , nor ambient air concentrations ( time-weighted average over 6 h ) between 50 and 100 ppm ( 188-375 mg/m(3) ) were convincingly associated with alterations in psycho-physiological and psycho-motoric performances or increased the frequency of subjective complaints in male volunteers .
For higher dose ranges of toluene exposure ( i.e. >1700 microg toluene/l blood [ or >100 ppm in ambient air] ) , our data set is too small for far reaching conclusions .
Our data are insufficient for conclusions on a possibly higher susceptibility to toluene of some female workers .
Results of kinetic studies and possible effects of long-term exposure are discussed in two accompanying publications ( Neubert et al. , 2001 ; Gericke et al. , 2001 ) .
