Surface soil and groundwater in Australia have been found to contain high concentrations of arsenic .
The relative importance of long-term human exposure to these sources has not been established .
Several studies have investigated long-term exposure to environmental arsenic concentrations using hair and toenails as the measure of exposure .
Few have compared the difference in these measures of environmental sources of exposure .
In this study we aimed to investigate risk factors for elevated hair and toenail arsenic concentrations in populations exposed to a range of environmental arsenic concentrations in both drinking water and soil as well as in a control population with low arsenic concentrations in both drinking water and soil .
In this study , we recruited 153 participants from areas with elevated arsenic concentrations in drinking water and residential soil , as well as a control population with no anticipated arsenic exposures .
The median drinking water arsenic concentrations in the exposed population were 43.8 micro g/L ( range , 16.0-73 micro g/L ) and median soil arsenic concentrations were 92.0 mg/kg ( range , 9.1-9,900 mg/kg ) .
In the control group , the median drinking water arsenic concentration was below the limit of detection , and the median soil arsenic concentration was 3.3 mg/kg .
Participants were categorized based on household drinking water and residential soil arsenic concentrations .
The geometric mean hair arsenic concentrations were 5.52 mg/kg for the drinking water exposure group and 3.31 mg/kg for the soil exposure group .
The geometric mean toenail arsenic concentrations were 21.7 mg/kg for the drinking water exposure group and 32.1 mg/kg for the high-soil exposure group .
Toenail arsenic concentrations were more strongly correlated with both drinking water and soil arsenic concentrations ; however , there is a strong likelihood of significant external contamination .
Measures of residential exposure were better predictors of hair and toenail arsenic concentrations than were local environmental concentrations .
