The determination of cumulative exposures for individual workers is necessary for research and practice of occupational health and hygiene .
Reconstruction of exposures for a study of respiratory morbidity was needed to study the effects of exposure to carbon black production .
Approximately 15,800 exposure estimates were needed .
There were 22 plants , a 40-year time span , six job categories , and three types of dust-exposure metrics ( respirable , inhalable , and " total " dust ) .
Three information sources were used : 1 ) Industrial hygiene air level measurements where available ( several industry-wide surveys had been conducted ) .
2 ) A formal process survey identifying specific dates and types of process and control changes .
3 ) An Historical Relative Exposure Rating Scale ; plant health and safety personnel used this spreadsheet-based rating scheme to quantify exposures before and between years of actual measurement relative to a reference year in which measurements were available .
A job-exposure matrix was calculated by integrating these three methods .
Linear scaling factors were identified to interconvert geometric to arithmetic means and to interconvert total and inhalable dust .
Individual worker cumulative exposures were then calculated based upon job histories linked with the job-exposure matrix .
The nine-step process for integrating all available relevant data was effective in estimating the exposures for each of the cells of the job-exposure matrix .
Among the 1680 workers participating , the mean cumulative inhalable dust exposure was 48.4 mg-years/m3 .
Early years contribute disproportionately to the cumulative exposures of individuals since levels have declined significantly over time .
The use of multiple sources of information , including a relative exposure rating instrument , significantly facilitates reconstruction of historical exposures .
Inadequate adjustment for temporal trends can lead to underestimation of cumulative exposures and significantly affect estimation of dose-effect relationships .
These methods are applicable to other situations requiring estimation of cumulative exposure with sparse industrial hygiene data in early years .
