The province of Guizhou in Southwestern China is currently one of the world's most important mercury production areas .
Emissions of mercury from the province to the global atmosphere have been estimated to be approximately 12% of the world total anthropogenic emissions .
The main objective of this study was to assess the level of contamination with Hg in two geographical areas of Guizhou province .
Mercury pollution in the areas concerned originates from mercury mining and ore processing in the area of Wanshan , while in the area of Quingzhen mercury pollution originates from the chemical industry discharging Hg through wastewaters and emissions to the atmosphere due to coal burning for electricity production .
The results of this study confirmed high contamination with Hg in soil , sediments and rice in the Hg mining area in Wanshan .
High levels of Hg in soil and rice were also found in the vicinity of the chemical plant in Quingzhen .
The concentrations of Hg decreased with distance from the main sources of pollution considerably .
The general conclusion is that Hg contamination in Wanshan is geographically more widespread , due to deposition and scavenging of Hg from contaminated air and deposition on land .
In Quingzhen Hg contamination of soil is very high close to the chemical plant but the levels reach background concentrations at a distance of several km .
Even though the major source of Hg in both areas is inorganic Hg , it was observed that active transformation of inorganic Hg to organic Hg species ( MeHg ) takes place in water , sediments and soils .
The concentration of Hg in rice grains can reach up to 569 microg/kg of total Hg of which 145 microg/kg was in MeHg form .
The percentage of Hg as MeHg varied from 5 to 83% .
The concentrations of selenium can reach up to 16 mg/kg in soil and up to 1 mg/g in rice .
A correlation exists between the concentration of Se in soil and rice , indicating that a portion of Se is bioavailable to plants .
No correlation between Hg and Se in rice was found .
Exposure of the local population to Hg may occur due to inhalation of Hg present in air ( in particular in Hg mining area ) and consumption of Hg contaminated food ( in particular rice and fish ) and water .
Comparison of intake through these different routes showed that the values of Hg considerably exceed the USA EPA Reference Concentration ( RfC ) for chronic Hg exposure ( RfC is 0.0004 mg/m(3) ) close to the emission sources .
Intake of Hg through food consumption , particularly rice and fish , is also an important route of Hg exposure in study area .
In general , it can be concluded that the population mostly at risk is located in the vicinity of smelting facilities , mining activities and close to the waste disposal sites in the wider area of Wanshan .
In order to assess the real level of contamination in the local population , it is recommended that biomonitoring should be performed , including Hg and MeHg measurements in hair , blood and urine samples .
