Open landfill dumping areas for municipal wastes in Asian developing countries have recently received particular attention with regard to environmental pollution problems .
Because of the uncontrolled burning of solid wastes , elevated contamination by various toxic chemicals including dioxins and related compounds in these dumping sites has been anticipated .
In this study , concentrations of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins ( PCDDs ) , polychlorinated dibenzofurans ( PCDFs ) , and coplanar polychlorinated biphenyls ( PCBs ) were determined in soils from dumping sites in the Philippines , Cambodia , India , and Vietnam .
Residue concentrations of PCDD/Fs and coplanar PCBs in dumping site soils were apparently greater than those in soils collected in agricultural or urban areas far from dumping sites , suggesting that dumping sites are potential sources of PCDD/Fs and related compounds .
Observed PCDD/F concentrations in soils from dumping sites in the Philippines and Cambodia were comparable or higher than those reported for dioxin-contaminated locations in the world ( e.g. , near the municipal waste incinerators and open landfill dumping sites ) .
Homologue profiles of PCDD/Fs in dumping site soils from the Philippines and , to a lesser extent , from Cambodia and India reflected patterns of samples representing typical emissions , while profiles of agricultural or urban soils were similar to those of typical environmental sinks .
This result suggests recent formation of PCDD/Fs in dumping site areas and that open dumping sites are a potential source of dioxins in Asian developing countries .
Uncontrolled combustions of solid wastes by waste pickers , generation of methane gas , and low-temperature burning can be major factors for the formation of dioxins in dumping sites .
Elevated fluxes of PCDD/Fs to soils in dumping sites were encountered in the Philippines , Cambodia , India , and Vietnam-Hanoi , and these levels were higher than those reported for other countries .
Considerable loading rates of PCDD/Fs in the dumping sites of these countries were observed , ranging from 20 to 3900 mg/yr ( 0.12-35 mg TEQ/yr ) .
PCDD/F concentrations in some soil samples from the Philippines , Cambodia , India , and Vietnam-Hanoi exceeded environmental guideline values , suggesting potential health effects on humans and wildlife living near these dumping sites .
The estimated intakes of dioxins via soil ingestion and dermal exposure for children were higher than those for adults , suggesting greater risk of dioxin exposure for children in dumping sites .
To our knowledge , this is the first comprehensive study on PCDD/Fs contamination in open dumping sites of Asian developing countries .
On the basis of the result of this study , we have addressed a new environmental issue that open dumping sites are potential sources of PCDD/Fs and related compounds , and dioxin contamination in dumping sites may become a key environmental problem in developing countries .
