Polybrominated diphenyl ethers ( PBDEs ) are widely used as flame retardants in consumer goods , such as plastics , electronics , textiles , and construction material .
PBDEs have been found in human milk , fat , and blood samples .
Rodent studies indicate that PBDEs may be detrimental to neurodevelopment , possibly by lowering thyroid hormone concentrations in blood .
In the present study , we determined concentrations of PBDEs and thyroid hormones in human fetal and maternal serum .
Patients presenting in labor to Indiana University and Wishard Memorial County hospitals in Indianapolis , who were older than 18 years , were recruited to participate .
Twelve paired samples of maternal and cord blood were obtained and analyzed using gas chromatographic mass spectrometry ; thyroid hormone concentrations were determined by radioimmunoassay .
Six congeners of PBDE were measured in maternal and fetal serum samples .
The concentrations of total PBDEs found in maternal sera ranged from 15 to 580 ng/g lipid , and the concentrations found in fetal samples ranged from 14 to 460 ng/g lipid .
Individual fetal blood concentrations did not differ from the corresponding maternal concentrations , indicating that measurement of maternal PBDE blood levels is useful in predicting fetal exposure ; similarly , other reports have shown a high correlation between PBDE in mother's milk and fetal exposure .
In accord with reports on other biologic samples , the tetrabrominated PBDE congener BDE-47 accounted for 53-64% of total PBDEs in the serum .
The concentrations of PBDEs found in maternal and fetal serum samples were 20-106-fold higher than the levels reported previously in a similar population of Swedish mothers and infants .
In this small sample , there was no apparent correlation between serum PBDEs and thyroid hormone concentrations .
Our study shows that human fetuses in the United States may be exposed to relatively high levels of PBDEs .
Further investigation is required to determine if these levels are specific to central Indiana and to assess the toxic potential of these exposure levels .
