Long-term arsenic exposure is associated with an increased risk of vascular diseases including ischemic heart disease , cerebrovascular disease , and carotid atherosclerosis .
The pathogenic mechanisms of arsenic atherogenicity are not completely clear .
A fundamental role for inflammation in atherosclerosis and its complications has become appreciated recently .
To investigate molecular targets of inflammatory pathway possibly involved in arsenic-associated atherosclerosis , we conducted an exploratory study using cDNA microarray and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay to identify genes with differential expression in arsenic-exposed yet apparently healthy individuals .
As an initial experiment , array hybridization was performed with mRNA isolated from activated lymphocytes of 24 study subjects with low ( 0-4.32 microg/L ) , intermediate ( 4.64-9.00 microg/L ) , and high ( 9.60-46.5 microg/L ) levels of blood arsenic , with each group comprising eight age- , sex- , and smoking frequency-matched individuals .
A total of 708 transcripts of known human genes were analyzed , and 62 transcripts ( 8.8% ) showed significant differences in the intermediate or high-arsenic groups compared with the low-level arsenic group .
Among the significantly altered genes , several cytokines and growth factors involving inflammation , including interleukin-1 beta , interleukin-6 , chemokine C-C motif ligand 2/monocyte chemotactic protein-1 ( CCL2/MCP1 ) , chemokine C-X-C motif ligand 1/growth-related oncogene alpha , chemokine C-X-C motif ligand 2/growth-related oncogene beta , CD14 antigen , and matrix metalloproteinase 1 ( interstitial collagenase ) were upregulated in persons with increased arsenic exposure .
Multivariate analyses on 64 study subjects of varying arsenic exposure levels showed that the association of CCL2/MCP1 plasma protein level with blood arsenic remained significant after adjustment for other risk factors of cardiovascular diseases .
The results of this gene expression study indicate that the expression of inflammatory molecules may be increased in human subjects after prolonged exposure to arsenic , which might be a contributory factor to the high risk of atherosclerosis in arseniasis-endemic areas in Taiwan .
Further multidisciplinary studies , including molecular epidemiologic investigations , are needed to elucidate the role of arsenic-associated inflammation in the development of atherosclerosis and subsequent cardiovascular disease .
