CONTEXT Exposure to ozone and particulate matter of 2.5 microm or less ( PM2.5 ) in air at levels above current US Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) standards is a risk factor for respiratory symptoms in children with asthma .
OBJECTIVE To examine simultaneous effects of ozone and PM2.5 at levels below EPA standards on daily respiratory symptoms and rescue medication use among children with asthma .
DESIGN , SETTING , AND PARTICIPANTS Daily respiratory symptoms and medication use were examined prospectively for 271 children younger than 12 years with physician-diagnosed , active asthma residing in southern New England .
Exposure to ambient concentrations of ozone and PM2.5 from April 1 through September 30 , 2001 , was assessed using ozone ( peak 1-hour and 8-hour ) and 24-hour PM2.5 .
Logistic regression analyses using generalized estimating equations were performed separately for maintenance medication users ( n = 130 ) and nonusers ( n = 141 ) .
Associations between pollutants ( adjusted for temperature , controlling for same- and previous-day levels ) and respiratory symptoms and use of rescue medication were evaluated .
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES Respiratory symptoms and rescue medication use recorded on calendars by subjects ' mothers .
RESULTS Mean ( SD ) levels were 59 ( 19 ) ppb ( 1-hour average ) and 51 ( 16 ) ppb ( 8-hour average ) for ozone and 13 ( 8 ) microg/m3 for PM2.5 .
In copollutant models , ozone level but not PM2.5 was significantly associated with respiratory symptoms and rescue medication use among children using maintenance medication ; a 50-ppb increase in 1-hour ozone was associated with increased likelihood of wheeze ( by 35% ) and chest tightness ( by 47% ) .
The highest levels of ozone ( 1-hour or 8-hour averages ) were associated with increased shortness of breath and rescue medication use .
No significant , exposure-dependent associations were observed for any outcome by any pollutant among children who did not use maintenance medication .
CONCLUSION Asthmatic children using maintenance medication are particularly vulnerable to ozone , controlling for exposure to fine particles , at levels below EPA standards .
