No previous reports exist on polybrominated diphenyl ether ( PBDE ) congeners in human milk from individual U.S. mothers .
This article on PBDEs is an extension of our previous studies on concentrations of dioxins , dibenzofurans , polychlorinated biphenyls , and other chlorinated organic compounds in human milk in a number of countries .
PBDE commercial products are used as flame retardants in flexible polyurethane foam ( penta-BDE ) , in acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene resins ( octa-BDE ) , and in high-impact polystyrene resins ( deca-BDE ) .
Their use is permitted in the United States but is banned in some European countries because of presumed toxicity , demonstrated persistence , and bioaccumulation .
Different commercial products can be found in various consumer products such as television sets , computers , computer monitors and printers , carpets , and upholstery .
Analyses of human levels of these compounds suggest low but rising levels in European human milk , which may have peaked , at least in Sweden , in the late 1990s .
Very few data exist on levels of PBDEs in humans in the United States , and none from milk from individual nursing mothers .
To address this issue , we analyzed 47 individual milk samples from nursing mothers , 20-41 years of age , from a milk bank in Austin , Texas , and a community women's health clinic in Dallas , Texas .
Up to 13 PBDE congeners were measured .
The concentrations of the sum of PBDE congeners varied from 6.2 to 419 ng/g ( or parts per billion ) lipid , with a median of 34 ng/g and a mean of 73.9 ng/g lipid .
The PBDE levels in breast milk from Texas were similar to levels found in U.S. blood and adipose tissue lipid from California and Indiana and are 10-100 times greater than human tissue levels in Europe .
Their detection in breast milk raises concern for potential toxicity to nursing infants , given the persistence and bioaccumulative nature of some of the PBDE congeners .
These results indicate a need for more detailed investigation of the levels of PBDE in people and food , as well as determining if animal fat in food is the major route of exposure of the general U.S. population .
Other routes of intake may also be significant .
