The Ojibwe Health Study ( OHS ) has concluded 10 years of data collection and exposure assessment .
Eight hundred and twenty-two participants from tribes in the states of Wisconsin , Michigan , and Minnesota ( USA ) completed fish consumption and environmental risk perception questionnaires .
Many participants provided hair and blood samples for mercury and polychlorinated biphenyl ( PCB ) residue analyses as body burden indicators of these persistent environmental pollutants .
Fish were collected by the tribal organizations and contaminants were analyzed for numerous tribal reports and professional environmental journal articles , these data were used by the Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife Commission to produce tribal-specific geographic information systems maps as part of a public health intervention strategy .
These maps are currently available at for six Wisconsin tribes that regularly harvest walleye .
To determine the health impacts ( if any ) of pollutants on cancer , diabetes , and reproduction , it was necessary to know the recent trends in key indicators such as cancer mortality ratios and birth gender ratios .
The Great Lakes Inter-Tribal Council provided the OHS and each participating tribe in Wisconsin and Michigan with a health profile .
Total fish consumption ( estimated by recall ) for 720 tribal participants was self-reported as 60 g/day , but the highest actual consumption was measured as 11.2 g/day in one of the tribal groups .
The highest blood concentrations in tribal participants were 18.6 ppb total serum PCBs and 11.8 ppb total blood mercury .
Ninety percent of the participants had less than 3.8 ppb total serum PCBs and 2.6 ppb total blood mercury .
Compared to other studies of subsistence fishing populations , these exposures were only moderately elevated and not high enough to warrant widespread restrictions on diets .
Furthermore , the benefits of eating a fish diet must be continually emphasized .
However , sport fishermen and their families who consume larger and more contaminated fish should abide by their state fish consumption advisories to minimize their health risks .
