Fish is an important natural resource in the diet of inhabitants of the Amazon rain forest and a marker of its consumption ( hair Hg ) was used to compare selected cardiovascular risk parameters between tribes of Eastern Amazonia .
Three Munduruku ( Terra Preta , Kaburua , Cururu ) villages and one Kayabi village at the banks of head rivers ( Tapajos , Tropas , Kabitutu , Cururu , Curuzinho , Teles Pires ) of the Tapajos Basin were studied in relation to fish Hg concentrations , mercury in hair ( fish consumption ) and erythrocytes , body mass index ( height/weight , kg/cm2 ) , and blood pressure .
The mean fish Hg concentrations were higher in predatory ( 578.6 ng/g ) than in nonpredatory species ( 52.8 ng/g ) .
Overall only 26% of fish Hg concentrations were above 500 ng/g , and only 11% were above 1000 ng/g .
There was no systematic trend in fish Hg concentrations from rivers with a history of gold-mining activities .
The biomarker of fish consumption ( hair Hg ) was significantly associated with erythrocyte-Hg ( r=0.5181 ; P=0.0001 ) and was significantly higher in Kayabi ( 12.7 microg/g ) than in the Munduruku ( 3.4 microg/g ) .
Biomarker-assessed fish consumption rate was higher in the Kayabi ( 110 g/day ) than in the Munduruku villages ( 30 g/day ) .
Although no significant differences in body mass index ( BMI ) were observed between tribes , there was a trend of lower increase in blood pressure with age among the higher fish consumers ( Kayabi ) .
Summary clinical evaluation did not detect neurologic complaints compatible with Hg intoxication ( paraparesis , numbness , tremor , balancing failure ) , but endemic tropical diseases such as clinical history of malaria showed a high prevalence ( 55.4% ) .
Fish is an abundant natural resource , important in the Indian diet , that has been historically consumed without perceived problems and can easily be traced through hair Hg .
The exposure to freshwater fish monomethyl mercury is less of an issue than endemic infectious diseases such as malaria and lack of basic medical services .
