Mercury ( Hg ) exposure in various forms remains a persistent public health concern in many parts of the world .
In previous studies , we have described a biomarker of mercury exposure characterized by increased urinary concentrations of specific porphyrins , pentacarboxyporphyrin ( 5-CP ) and coproporphyrin ( 4-CP ) , and the atypical keto-isocoproporphyrin ( KICP ) , based on selective interference with the fifth ( uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase , UROD ) and sixth ( coproporphyrinogen oxidase , CPOX ) enzymes of the heme biosynthetic pathway .
Whereas this response occurs in a predictable manner among approximately 85% of subjects with Hg exposure , an atypical porphyrinogenic response ( APR ) has been observed in approximately 15% of Hg-exposed persons , in which the three porphyrins that are affected by Hg , i.e. , 5-CP , 4-CP and , KICP , are excreted in substantial excess of that predicted on the basis of Hg exposure alone .
This APR has been attributed to a specific polymorphism in exon 4 of the CPOX gene ( CPOX4 ) .
In the present study , we sought to further confirm the hypothesis that the observed changes in porphyrin excretion patterns might serve as a biomarker of Hg exposure and potential toxicity by statistically modeling the cascading effects on porphyrin concentrations within the heme biosynthetic pathway of Hg exposure and CPOX4 polymorphism in a human population with long-term occupational exposure to elemental mercury .
Our results are highly consistent with this hypothesis .
After controlling for precursor porphyrin concentrations , we demonstrated that 5-CP and 4-CP are independently associated with Hg concentration , while KICP is associated only with the CPOX4 .
An unpredicted association of Hg with heptacarboxyporphyrin ( 7-CP ) may indicate a previously unidentified point of mercury inhibition of UROD .
These findings lend further support to the proposed utility of urinary porphyrin changes as a biomarker of exposure and potential toxicity in subjects with mercury exposure .
Additionally , these findings demonstrate the successful application of a computational model for characterizing complex metabolic responses and interactions associated with both toxicant exposure and genetic variation in human subjects .
