Artisanal gold mining ( AGM ) with metallic mercury has a long history in Ghana .
It is believed to be over 2,000 years old .
Today , AGM has escalated in a new dimension consuming about half of the country where gold lode deposits exist along riverbanks or rivers are alluvial-gold rich .
The Pra River in southwestern Ghana is a site of on going application of metallic mercury in prospecting gold , and this paper examines mercury ( Hg ) contamination in the different environmental compartments in its watershed .
Samples of water , sediment , soil and biota ( i.e. , human hair and fish ) were collected from locations along the course of the river during the rainy and dry seasons of 2002 and 2003 , respectively .
Besides the obvious Hg point sources along the Pra and its tributaries , the obtained results show that Hg levels and speciation in the studied aquatic system are controlled by precipitation , which drives the hydrology and differences in flow regimes versus seasons .
The seasonal difference in Hg speciation suggests that methyl mercury ( MeHg ) found in the aqueous phase and riverine sediments is likely of terrestrial origin where its production is favored during the rainy season by high soil water and organic matter content .
The use of the enrichment factor ( EF ) for the assessment of sediment quality indicated moderate to severe contamination of surface sediments in the rainy season , while in the dry season , the EF index indicates nearly no pollution of surface sediments .
Accordingly , most of the Hg introduced into this river system is likely transported to depositional downstream terminal basins ( e.g. the river delta and the Gulf of Guinea ) .
With regard to biota , Hg measured in hair in the dry period was higher than data obtained on samples collected during the wet period .
This could be explained at least in part by the shift in diet as a result of abundance of fish in the local markets and the concurrent increase and more active fishing during the dry season .
Mercury data obtained on a very limited number of fish samples collected during the dry period only are also presented .
