Contaminated fish poses a difficult challenge throughout the world , on the one hand , fish is a very nutritious food source , while on the other hand it accumulates many toxic substances , including mercury ( Hg ) .
As part of our efforts in the Brazilian Amazon to maximize nutritional input from fish consumption , a dietary mainstay , and minimize toxic risk , we have been studying the role of selenium ( Se ) , an essential element , that may influence the distribution of Hg in the body and influence Hg neurotoxicity .
Se , which is naturally present in the soil , is ingested through consumption of various foods , notably fish , mammals and certain plants .
The objectives of the present study were : ( i ) evaluate whole blood Se ( B-Se ) and Hg ( B-Hg ) ; ( ii ) characterize B-Se variations with respect to socio-demographic and dietary variables ; and ( iii ) examine the relation between B-Se and B-Hg .
A total of 236 persons from six riparian communities of the Tapajós River Basin , a tributary of the Amazon , participated in this study .
Whole blood Se and Hg were measured and interview administered questionnaires were used to obtain data on socio-demographic variable , smoking and drinking habits , and fish and fruit consumption .
The results show that B-Se are in the upper normal range ( median=284.3 microg/L , range=142.1-2029.3 microg/L ) .
No individuals presented B-Se deficiency , but 9 participants from the same extended family had relatively high B-Se levels , potentially a threat to their health .
B-Se varied between communities , was significantly higher among alcohol drinkers and farmers , but not associated with age , sex or tobacco consumption .
A significant positive relation between B-Se and B-Hg was noted , independently of the overall fish consumption .
B-Se increased with consumption of Peacock bass ( Cichla sp. ) , a piscivorous fish species , and coconut pulp ( Cocos nucifera L. ) .
The B-Se intercommunity variations may reflect geographic differences in local soil Se levels as well as traditional land use practices in the different ecosystems of the Tapajós River Basin .
In this population with relatively high exposure to Hg , Se may play an important role .
Further studies should examine , in this region , the sources of Se , its transmission through the terrestrial and aquatic ecosystem and its role with respect to human health .
