The comprehensive individual field-measurements on non-dietary exposure collected in the Children's-Post-Pesticide-Application-Exposure-Study ( CPPAES ) were used within MENTOR/SHEDS-Pesticides , a physically based stochastic human exposure and dose model .
In this application , however , the model was run deterministically .
The MENTOR/SHEDS-Pesticides employed the CPPAES as input variables to simulate the exposure and the dose profiles for seven children over a 2-week post-application period following a routine residential and professional indoor crack-and-crevice chlorpyrifos application .
The input variables were obtained from a personal activity diary , microenvironmental measurements and personal biomonitoring data obtained from CPPAES samples collected from the individual children and in their homes .
Simulation results were compared with CPPAES field measured values obtained from the children's homes to assess the utility of the different microenvironmental data collected in CPPAES , i.e. indicator toys and wipe samplers to estimate aggregate exposures that can be result from one or more exposure pathways and routes .
The final analyses of the database involved comparisons of the actual data obtained from the individual biomarker samples of a urinary metabolite of chlorpyrifos ( TCPy ) and the values predicted by MENTOR/SHEDS-Pesticides using the CPPAES-derived variables .
Because duplicate diet samples were not part of the CPPAES study design , SHEDs-Pesticides simulated dose profiles did not account for the dietary route .
The research provided more confidence in the types of data that can be used in the inhalation and dermal contact modules of MENTOR/SHEDS-Pesticides to predict the pesticide dose received by a child .
It was determined that we still need additional understanding about : ( 1 ) the types of activities and durations of activities that result in non-dietary ingestion of pesticides and ( 2 ) the influence of dietary exposures on the levels of TCPy found in the urine .
