After moving into a new office building , employees complained about eye irritations , sore throats and unspecific symptoms .
They were concerned about visible dust as a potential cause of adverse health effects .
An external working group was appointed to investigate indoor air pollution and health complaints and to suggest measures to improve the situation .
Air samples and floor dust samples for analysis of organic compounds were collected in three offices .
Bimonthly during 8 months , measurement campaigns were conducted to assess the trend of air pollutants .
A questionnaire was administered concerning environmental conditions at the work place and complaints before and after moving into the new office building .
Overall the concentrations of volatile organic compounds ( VOC ) and formaldehyde were fairly low .
However , initially high concentrations ( 4300-7800 mg/kg ) of tris-(2-butoxyethyl)-phosphate ( TBEP ) and diethylhexylphthalate ( DEHP : 980-3000 mg/kg ) were found in dust samples .
The coating of the rubber floor was identified as the source of TBEP , while no single predominant source of DEHP was found .
Results of the questionnaire demonstrated an increased irritation of the mucous membranes and a reduction of well-being after the employees had moved into the new building .
Perception of low relative humidity and high temperature as well as unpleasant odors were associated with respiratory complaints .
After removal of the coating of the rubber floor throughout the whole building , a reduction up to 90% of TBEP in the dust samples was found .
In spite of several attempts , no such marked reduction was achieved with the concentration of phthalates .
Although there was no significant association between visible dust exposure and increase of complaints after moving in , room climate conditions that could increase the deposition of dust in the airways were associated with the complaints .
Hence it cannot be ruled out that fine dust containing TBEP together with unfavorable indoor factors were responsible for the development of the complaints .
