INTRODUCTION To understand the severity of the arsenic crisis in West Bengal , India , a detailed , 3-year study was undertaken in Murshidabad , one of the nine arsenic-affected districts in West Bengal .
The district covers an area of 5324 km2 with a population of 5.3 million .
METHODS Hand tubewell water samples and biologic samples were collected from Murshidabad and analyzed for arsenic by FI-HG-AAS method .
Inter laboratory analysis and analyses of standards were undertaken for quality assurance .
RESULTS During our survey we analyzed 29,612 hand tubewell water samples for arsenic from both contaminated and non-contaminated areas , and 26% of the tubewells were found to have arsenic above 50 microg/L while 53.8% had arsenic above 10 microg/L .
Of the 26 blocks in Murshidabad , 24 were found to have arsenic above 50 microg/L .
Based on our generated data we estimated that approximately 0.2 million hand tubewells are installed in all 26 blocks of Murshidabad and 1.8 million in nine arsenic-affected districts of West Bengal .
It was estimated on the basis of our data that about 2.5 million and 1.2 million people were drinking arsenic-contaminated water with concentrations above 10 and 50 microg/L levels respectively in this district .
The analysis of total 3800 biologic ( nail , urine , and hair ) samples from arsenic-affected villages revealed that 95% of the nail and 94% of the urine samples contained arsenic above the normal levels and 75% of the hair samples were found to have arsenic above the toxic level .
Thus , many villagers in the affected areas of Murshidabad might be subclinically affected .
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION Comparing our extrapolated data with international dose response results , we estimated how many people may suffer from arsenical skin lesions and cancer .
Finally , if the exposed population is provided safe water , better nutrition , and proper awareness about the arsenic problem , lives can be saved and countless suffering of the affected population can be avoided .
