INTRODUCTION To understand the severity of related health effects of chronic arsenic exposure in West Bengal , a detailed 3-year study was carried out in Murshidabad , one of the nine arsenic-affected districts in West Bengal .
METHODS We screened 25,274 people from 139 arsenic-affected villages in Murshidabad to identify patients suffering from chronic arsenic toxicity for evidence of multisystemic features and collected biological samples such as head hair , nail , and spot urine from the patients along with the tubewell water they were consuming .
RESULTS Out of 25,274 people screened , 4813 ( 19% ) were registered with arsenical skin lesions .
A case series involving arsenical skin lesions resulting in cancer and gangrene were noted during this study .
Representative histopathological pictures of skin biopsy of different types of lesions were also presented .
Out of 2595 children we examined for arsenical skin lesions , 122 ( 4% ) were registered with arsenical skin lesions , melanosis with or without keratosis .
Different clinical and electrophysiological neurological features were noticed among the arsenic-affected villagers .
Both the arsenic content in the drinking water and duration of exposure may be responsible in increasing the susceptibility of pregnant women to spontaneous abortions , stillbirths , preterm births , low birth weights , and neonatal deaths .
Some additional multisystemic features such as weakness and lethargy , chronic respiratory problems , gastrointestinal symptoms , and anemia were also recorded in the affected population .
DISCUSSION The findings from this survey on different health effects of arsenic exposure were compared to those from previous studies carried out on arsenic-affected populations in India and Bangladesh as well as other affected countries .
CONCLUSION Multisystemic disorders , including dermal effects , neurological complications , and adverse obstetric outcomes , were observed to be associated with chronic arsenic exposure in the study population in Murshidabad , West Bengal .
The magnitude of severity was related to the concentration of arsenic in water as well as duration of the exposure .
