BACKGROUND Personal exposure to pollutants is influenced by various outdoor and indoor sources .
The aim of this study was to evaluate the exposure of Athens citizens to toluene and xylene , excluding exposure from active smoking .
METHODS Passive air samplers were used to monitor volunteers , their homes and various urban sites for one year , resulting in 2400 measurements of toluene and xylene levels .
Since both indoor and outdoor pollution contribute significantly to human exposure , volunteers were chosen from occupational groups who spend a lot of time in the streets ( traffic policemen , bus drivers and postmen ) , and from groups who spend more time indoors ( teachers and students ) .
Data on individual and house characteristics were obtained using a questionnaire completed at the beginning of the study ; a time-location-activity diary was also completed daily by the volunteers in each of the six monitoring campaigns .
RESULTS Average personal toluene exposure varied over the six monitoring campaigns from 53 to 80 microg/m3 .
Urban and indoor concentrations ranged from 47-84 microg/m3 and 30 - 51 microg/m3 , respectively .
Average personal xylene exposure varied between 56 and 85 microg/m3 while urban and indoor concentrations ranged from 53-88 microg/m3 and 27-48 microg/m3 , respectively .
Urban pollution , indoor residential concentrations and personal exposures exhibited the same pattern of variation during the measurement periods .
This variation among monitoring campaigns might largely be explained by differences in climate parameters , namely wind speed , humidity and amount of sunlight .
CONCLUSION In Athens , Greece , the time spent outdoors in the city center during work or leisure makes a major contribution to exposure to toluene and xylene among non-smoking citizens .
Indoor pollution and means of transportation contribute significantly to individual exposure levels .
Other indoor residential characteristics such as recent painting and mode of heating used might also contribute significantly to individual levels .
Groups who may be subject to higher exposures ( e.g. those who spent more time outdoors because of occupational activities ) need to be surveyed and protected against possible adverse health effects .
