The detection of exposure of pregnant women to toxicants in the environment is important because these compounds can be harmful to the health of the woman and her fetus .
The aim of this study was to analyze for pesticides/herbicides in paired maternal hair and blood samples to determine the most appropriate matrix for detecting maternal exposure to these compounds .
A total of 449 pregnant women were prospectively recruited at midgestation from an agricultural site in the Philippines where a preliminary survey indicated significant use at home and on the farm of the following compounds : propoxur , cyfluthrin , chlorpyrifos , cypermethrin , pretilachlor , bioallethrin , malathion , diazinon , and transfluthrin .
Paired maternal hair and blood samples were obtained from each subject upon recruitment into the study ( midgestation ) and at birth and were analyzed for the above compounds , as well as lindane and DDT [ 1,1,1-trichloro-2-2-bis(p-chlorophenyl) ethane ] , and some of their known metabolites by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry .
The highest exposure rate was seen for propoxur and bioallethrin and maternal hair analysis provided the highest detection rate for these two compounds , compared to blood , at both time periods : ( 1 ) At midgestation , 10.5% positive for propoxur in hair compared to 0.7% in blood ( P<0.001 ) and for bioallethrin , 11.9% positive in hair compared to 0% in blood ( P < or = 0.001 ) , and ( 2 ) at birth , 11.8% positive for propoxur in hair compared to 4% in blood ( P < or = 0.001 ) and for bioallethrin , 7.8% in hair compared to 0% in blood ( P < or = 0.001 ) .
A small number of maternal hair samples were also positive for malathion , chlorpyrifos , pretilachlor , and DDT .
Only a few of the pesticide metabolites were detected , principally 3-phenoxybenzoic acid , malathion monocarboxylic acid , and DDE [ 1,1,dichloro-2-2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethylene ] , and they were mostly found in maternal blood .
There was a significant association between the use of the home spray pesticide , Baygon , and propoxur in maternal hair at birth ( P=0.001 ) and between the use of a slow-burning mosquito coil and the presence of bioallethrin in maternal hair at midgestation and at birth ( P=0.001 , P < or = 0.041 , respectively ) .
There is significant exposure of the pregnant woman to pesticides , particularly to pesticides that are used at home .
Our study demonstrates the advantages of analyzing maternal hair as a readily available biologic matrix for studying maternal exposure to toxicants in the environment , compared to blood .
For propoxur , there was a 3- to 15-fold higher detection rate of the pesticide in maternal hair as compared to blood .
As for the other pesticides , bioallethrin , malathion , chlorpyrifos , and DDT were exclusively found in maternal hair compared to blood .
On the other hand , pesticide metabolites were infrequently found in maternal hair or maternal blood .
Pesticides in blood most likely represent acute exposure , whereas pesticides in hair represent past and/or concurrent exposure .
The high sensitivity , wide window of exposure , availability , and ease of hair collection are distinct advantages in using hair to detect exposure to pesticides among pregnant women .
However , pesticides in maternal hair may also be secondary to passive exposure and therefore not truly representative of the internal pesticide dose .
Finally , the analysis of maternal hair for pesticides as an index of maternal exposure to pesticides in the environment allows the institution of measures to prevent further exposure during pregnancy .
