CONTEXT Dental ( silver ) amalgam is a widely used restorative material containing 50% elemental mercury that emits small amounts of mercury vapor .
No randomized clinical trials have determined whether there are significant health risks associated with this low-level mercury exposure .
OBJECTIVE To assess the safety of dental amalgam restorations in children .
DESIGN A randomized clinical trial in which children requiring dental restorative treatment were randomized to either amalgam for posterior restorations or resin composite instead of amalgam .
Enrollment commenced February 1997 , with annual follow-up for 7 years concluding in July 2005 .
SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS A total of 507 children in Lisbon , Portugal , aged 8 to 10 years with at least 1 carious lesion on a permanent tooth , no previous exposure to amalgam , urinary mercury level <10 microg/L , blood lead level <15 microg/dL , Comprehensive Test of Nonverbal Intelligence IQ > or =67 , and with no interfering health conditions .
INTERVENTION Routine , standard-of-care dental treatment , with one group receiving amalgam restorations for posterior lesions ( n = 253 ) and the other group receiving resin composite restorations instead of amalgam ( n = 254 ) .
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES Neurobehavioral assessments of memory , attention/concentration , and motor/visuomotor domains , as well as nerve conduction velocities .
RESULTS During the 7-year trial period , children had a mean of 18.7 tooth surfaces ( median , 16 ) restored in the amalgam group and 21.3 ( median , 18 ) restored in the composite group .
Baseline mean creatinine-adjusted urinary mercury levels were 1.8 microg/g in the amalgam group and 1.9 microg/g in the composite group , but during follow-up were 1.0 to 1.5 microg/g higher in the amalgam group than in the composite group ( P<.001 ) .
There were no statistically significant differences in measures of memory , attention , visuomotor function , or nerve conduction velocities ( average z scores were very similar , near zero ) for the amalgam and composite groups over all 7 years of follow-up , with no statistically significant differences observed at any time point ( P values from .29 to .91 ) .
Starting at 5 years after initial treatment , the need for additional restorative treatment was approximately 50% higher in the composite group .
CONCLUSIONS In this study , children who received dental restorative treatment with amalgam did not , on average , have statistically significant differences in neurobehavioral assessments or in nerve conduction velocity when compared with children who received resin composite materials without amalgam .
These findings , combined with the trend of higher treatment need later among those receiving composite , suggest that amalgam should remain a viable dental restorative option for children .
TRIAL REGISTRATION clinicaltrials.gov Identifier : NCT00066118 .
