This study conducted in Bangladesh reports the relationship of clinical complications with nutritional status and the prevalence of leukopenia among arsenic exposed patients living in the rural villages .
A total of 115 exposed individuals diagnosed as arsenicosis patients were randomly selected from four known arsenic endemic villages , and age-matched 120 unexposed subjects were enrolled in the study program .
The duration of arsenic exposure in about 37% of the patients was at least 10 yrs , while the population mean and range were 7.6 +/- 5.2 yrs , and 1 - 25 yrs , respectively .
The mean arsenic concentrations in the drinking water for the exposed and unexposed ( control ) population were 218.1 microg/L and 11.3 microg/L , respectively .
The spot urine sample of the arsenicosis patients contained an average of 234.6 microg/L arsenic .
Although very few patients showed elevated WBC count , 16% had leukopenia ( below normal count ) , and the whole population had significantly low WBC count than the control subjects .
Prevalences of neutropenia and lymphocytosis were observed in patients with chronic exposure to high levels of arsenic in water .
The body mass index was found to be lower than 18.5 , the cut-off point for malnutrition ( underweight ) , in about 28% of the arsenicosis cases compared to 15% of the controls .
The monthly income and total calorie consumption per day showed the patients were underprivileged than the controls .
Arsenical symptoms and complications were more severe in the nutritionally vulnerable ( underweight ) patients than the overweight ones .
Also , the incidences of leukopenia and anaemia were more common in the female patients who were underweight .
The findings of this research demonstrate that the poor nutritional status of patients increases the complications of chronic arsenic toxicity ; suggest the possibility of other sources of arsenic contamination different from drinking water in the study area ; and establish a higher prevalence of leukopenia and lymphocytosis in arsenicosis patients .
