OBJECTIVES The fatty acid composition and other nutrients in traditional Inuit food appear to provide some protection against diseases of affluent industrialized societies , such as cardiovascular diseases and type 2 diabetes .
A transition towards increased amounts of imported food might increase the occurrence of these diseases among Inuit .
However , since the 1970s it has become evident that the marine-based Inuit diet also contains high levels of potentially toxic lipophilic organic pollutants and heavy metals .
Since these two opposing effects on health appear to be inseparable , the phenomenon has become known as " The Arctic Dilemma " .
However , both the fatty acid composition and the contaminant levels vary in Greenlandic food items .
Thus , in theory , it is possible to compose a diet where the benefits outweigh the risks .
Our objective was to compare traditional and modern meals in Greenland regarding dietary composition , content of n-3 fatty acids and contaminants .
STUDY DESIGN The present study was part of the Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme , AMAP , comparing the results of dietary composition and nutrients in 177 traditional meals collected in Uummannaq municipality , north Greenland in 1976 with 90 meals sampled in Uummannaq town in 2004 under similar conditions .
Eleven pesticides , 14 PCB congeners , heavy metals , selenium , and fatty acids were analysed in meals and blood samples from the participants .
Contaminant levels were compared between 1976 and 2004 after adjustment for n-3 fatty acids , indicating local food content .
RESULTS Between the traditional meals collected 30 years ago and the meals from 2004 , dramatic and significant changes have occurred in the dietary composition .
The percentage of local food has decreased , and with it the intake of n-3 fatty acids .
Calculated as daily intake , all but three contaminants had decreased significantly .
However , this could be explained by the lower intake of local food .
After adjustment for n-3 fatty acid content in the food , significant declines of concentration in the local food were evident only for PCBs and lead , whereas for mercury , DDTs , and chlordanes the levels were unchanged , and for hexachlorobenzene , mirex , and toxaphenes , the levels had increased significantly .
CONCLUSION The consumption of locally produced food has decreased in Greenland during the last 30 years and this has led to a reduction in the daily intake of contaminants .
However , the concentrations of contaminants in local food items have not decreased , except for PCB and Lead .
Therefore , we recommend that the consumption of local products is not increased beyond the present level , until the level of contaminants is reduced to a safer level .
