Large alluvial deltas of the Mekong River in southern Vietnam and Cambodia and the Red River in northern Vietnam have groundwaters that are exploited for drinking water by private tube-wells , which are of increasing demand since the mid-1990s .
This paper presents an overview of groundwater arsenic pollution in the Mekong delta : arsenic concentrations ranged from 1-1610 microg/L in Cambodia ( average 217 microg/L ) and 1-845 microg/L in southern Vietnam ( average 39 microg/L ) , respectively .
It also evaluates the situation in Red River delta where groundwater arsenic concentrations vary from 1-3050 microg/L ( average 159 microg/L ) .
In addition to rural areas , the drinking water supply of the city of Hanoi has elevated arsenic concentrations .
The sediments of 12-40 m deep cores from the Red River delta contain arsenic levels of 2-33 microg/g ( average 7 microg/g , dry weight ) and show a remarkable correlation with sediment-bound iron .
In all three areas , the groundwater arsenic pollution seem to be of natural origin and caused by reductive dissolution of arsenic-bearing iron phases buried in aquifers .
The population at risk of chronic arsenic poisoning is estimated to be 10 million in the Red River delta and 0.5-1 million in the Mekong delta .
A subset of hair samples collected in Vietnam and Cambodia from residents drinking groundwater with arsenic levels >50 microg/L have a significantly higher arsenic content than control groups ( <50 microg/L ) .
Few cases of arsenic related health problems are recognized in the study areas compared to Bangladesh and West Bengal .
This difference probably relates to arsenic contaminated tube-well water only being used substantially over the past 7 to 10 years in Vietnam and Cambodia .
Because symptoms of chronic arsenic poisoning usually take more than 10 years to develop , the number of future arsenic related ailments in Cambodia and Vietnam is likely to increase .
Early mitigation measures should be a high priority .
