OBJECTIVES The purpose of this study is to monitor and assess human exposure to pollution in the Arctic which presents a potential future health risk for the local populations .
Epidemiological studies in Greenland have shown that human blood levels of several organic contaminants are very high , especially in the North where people depend on local food .
In East Greenland ( Ittoqqortoormiit ( Scoresbysund) ) the population shows the highest blood levels of several persistent organic pollutants found in Arctic countries , especially PCB , the levels of which exceed Canadian guideline levels .
As in other Arctic countries , the predominant source of these contaminants is the local diet .
However , other factors such as smoking may influence the metabolism and thereby the accumulation of toxic substances .
STUDY DESIGN This project is part of the human health program of the ongoing circumpolar " Artic Monitoring and Assessment Programme " .
Lifestyle , anthropometric factors , and dietary survey results covering 500 men and women from 6 Greenlandic districts were analyzed along with other factors blood lipids , fatty acid profiles , heavy metals and concentrations of persistent organic pollutants ( POPs ) .
RESULTS The dietary survey showed that the traditional food on the average provided 20-30% of the total energy intake .
However , the relative monthly meal intake of seal , whale , polar bear , fish and game , and the composition of imported food , varied between districts .
Seal and polar bear intake , and , in particular all the plasma n-3 fatty acids , were significantly correlated with organic contaminant concentrations , ( betaHCH , chlordanes , DDTs , Hexachlorobenzene , Mirex , PCBs , and toxaphenes ) p<0.01() .
After adjusting for age , district , dietary factors or plasma n-3 fatty acids , smoking was significantly correlated with high levels of all the above mentioned POPs .
CONCLUSION The main predictors of high contaminant levels in Greenland were age , district , male gender , smoking and high plasma n-3/n-6 ratio as a marker of high dietary intake of local marine mammals .
