OBJECTIVE This study was directed to ascertain the mortality of a group of arseniasis patients in an endemic rural township in Southwest China , where the residents were exposed for decades to indoor combustion of high arsenic coal .
METHODS All the diagnosed arseniasis cases registered in 1991 were defined as the target population , which were assigned to three symptom subgroups by the severity of dermal lesions .
The death cases were surveyed and checked .
The follow-up period was 12.5 years .
The standardized mortality ratio ( SMR ) of all death causes combined , all cancers combined , and the cancers at every site were analyzed .
The age standardized mortality rates ( ASMRs ) were calculated in three subgroups using the procedure of standardization .
RESULTS One hundred and six death cases were recorded .
Liver cirrhosis , non-melanotic skin cancer , lung and liver cancer were the four most prevalent death causes and referred to 70.8% ( 75/106 ) of the total death cases .
The mortality of all death causes combined was not higher than that of the whole of China in 2001 ( SMR = 0.76 , 95% CI 0.63-0.93 ) .
The crude mortality rate of non-melanotic skin cancer in males reached up to 128.66/10(5) .
SMRs of lung cancer and larynx cancer in males ( SMRs 2.84 and 27.27 , 95% CIs 1.51-4.86 and 5.61-79.62 , respectively ) significantly exceeded the levels for all male Chinese .
ASMRs of all death causes combined , all cancers combined and non-melanotic skin cancer in males of the severe dermal symptoms subgroup were significantly higher than those in medium and/or mild dermal symptom subgroups .
CONCLUSIONS A significantly increased mortality due to lung cancer and non-melanotic skin cancer was confirmed , alike the situation in other arseniasis endemic areas in the world .
No significant elevation of mortality due to liver cancer and bladder cancer was observed .
Male arseniasis patients diagnosed with severe skin lesions face higher risks of malignancies and of non-melanotic skin cancer in particular in the following years .
