More and more people in Bangladesh have recently become aware of the risk of drinking arsenic-contaminated groundwater , and have been trying to obtain drinking water from less arsenic-contaminated sources .
In this study , arsenic intakes of 18 families living in one block of a rural village in an arsenic-affected district of Bangladesh were evaluated to investigate their actual arsenic intake via food , including from cooking water , and to estimate the contribution of each food category and of drinking water to the total arsenic intake .
Water consumption rates were estimated by the self-reporting method .
The mean drinking water intake was estimated as about 3 L/d without gender difference .
Arsenic intakes from food were evaluated by the duplicate portion sampling method .
The duplicated foods from each family were divided into four categories ( cooked rice , solid food , cereals for breakfast , and liquid food ) , and the arsenic concentrations of each food category and of the drinking water were measured .
The mean arsenic intake from water and food by all 18 respondents was 0.15 +/-0.11 mg/d ( range , 0.043 - 0.49 ) , that by male subjects was 0.18 +/- 0.13 mg/d ( n = 12 ) and that by female subjects was 0.096 +/- 0.007 mg/d ( n = 6 ) .
The average contributions to the total arsenic intake were , from drinking water , 13% ; liquid food , 4.4% ; cooked rice , 56% ; solid food , 11% ; and cereals , 16% .
Arsenic intake via drinking water was not high despite the highly contaminated groundwater in the survey area because many families had changed their drinking water sources to less-contaminated ones .
Instead , cooked rice contributed most to the daily arsenic intake .
Use of contaminated water for cooking by several families was suspected based on comparisons of arsenic concentrations between drinking water and liquid food , and between rice before and after cooking .
Detailed investigation suggested that six households used contaminated water for cooking but not drinking , leading to an increase of arsenic intake via arsenic-contaminated cooking water .
