A pilot observational exposure study was performed to evaluate methods for collecting multimedia measurements ( air , dust , food , urine ) and activity patterns to assess potential exposures of young children to pesticides in their homes .
Nine children ( mean age=5 years ) and their caregivers participated in this study , performed in the Duval County , Florida , in collaboration with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Duval County Health Department .
For all nine children , the total time reported for sleeping and napping ranged from 9.5 to 14 h per day , indoor quiet time from 0 to 5.5 h per day , indoor active time from 0.75 to 5.5 h per day , outdoor quiet time from 0 to 1.5 h per day , and outdoor active time from 0.5 to 6.5 h per day .
Each home had one to three pesticide products present , with aerosols being most common .
Pesticide inventories , however , were not useful for predicting pesticide levels in the home .
Synthetic pyrethroids were the most frequently identified active ingredients in the products present in each home .
Fifteen pesticide active ingredients were measured in the application area wipes ( not detected ( ND ) to 580 ng/cm(2) ) , 13 in the play area wipes ( ND-117 ng/cm(2) ) , and 14 in the indoor air samples ( ND-378 ng/m(3) ) and the socks ( ND-1000 ng/cm(2) ) .
Cis-permethrin , trans-permethrin , and cypermethrin were measured in all nine homes .
Chlorpyrifos was measured in all nine homes even though it was not reported used by the participants .
All urine samples contained measurable concentrations of 3-phenoxybenzoic acid ( 3-PBA ) .
The median 3-PBA urinary concentration for the nine children was 2.2 mug/l .
A wide variety of pesticide active ingredients were measured in these nine homes at median concentrations that were often higher than reported previously in similar studies .
These data highlight the need for additional observational studies in regions where pesticides are used in order to understand the factors that affect young children's exposures and the education/mitigation strategies that can be used to reduce children's exposures .
