The genotoxic effects of air pollutant exposures have been studied in people living and working in Map Ta Phut , Rayong province , Thailand , a site where is located the Map Ta Phut Industrial Estate ( MIE ) one of the largest steel , refinery and petrochemical complex in the South-Eastern Asia .
This was done by the conduction of a transversal study aimed to compare the prevalence of bulky DNA adducts in groups of subjects experiencing various degree of air pollution .
DNA adduct analysis was performed in the leukocytes of 201 volunteers by the ( 32)P-postlabelling assay : 79 were workers in the MIE complex , including 24 refinery workers , 40 steel workers and 15 tinplate workers , 72 were people residing downwind in the MIE area and 50 were residents in a control district of the same Rayong province but without industrial exposures .
The groups of workers were analyzed separately to evaluate if DNA adduct formation differs by the type of industry .
The levels of bulky DNA adducts were 1.17+/-0.17 ( SE ) adducts/10(8) nucleotides in refinery workers , 1.19+/-0.19 ( SE ) in steel workers , 0.87+/-0.17 ( SE ) in tinplate workers , 0.85+/-0.07 ( SE ) in MIE residents and 0.53+/-0.05 ( SE ) in district controls .
No effects of smoking habits on DNA adducts was found .
The multivariate regression analysis shows that the levels of DNA adducts were significantly increased among the individuals living near the MIE industrial complex in respect to those resident in a control district ( p<0.05 ) .
In the groups of occupationally exposed workers , the highest levels of DNA adducts were found among the workers experiencing an occupational exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons , e.g. the steel factory and refinery workers .
When we have evaluated if the levels of DNA adducts of the PAH exposed workers were different from those of the MIE residents , a statistical significantly difference was found ( p<0.05 ) .
Our present study indicates that people living near point sources of industrial air pollution can experiment an excess of DNA adduct formation .
The emissions from the MIE complex are the main source of air pollution in this area and can be the cause of such increment in the levels of DNA damage .
