A Bayesian approach , implemented using Markov Chain Monte Carlo ( MCMC ) analysis , was applied with a physiologically-based pharmacokinetic ( PBPK ) model of methylmercury ( MeHg ) to evaluate the variability of MeHg exposure in women of childbearing age in the U.S. population .
The analysis made use of the newly available National Health and Nutrition Survey ( NHANES ) blood and hair mercury concentration data for women of age 16-49 years ( sample size , 1,582 ) .
Bayesian analysis was performed to estimate the population variability in MeHg exposure ( daily ingestion rate ) implied by the variation in blood and hair concentrations of mercury in the NHANES database .
The measured variability in the NHANES blood and hair data represents the result of a process that includes interindividual variation in exposure to MeHg and interindividual variation in the pharmacokinetics ( distribution , clearance ) of MeHg .
The PBPK model includes a number of pharmacokinetic parameters ( e.g. , tissue volumes , partition coefficients , rate constants for metabolism and elimination ) that can vary from individual to individual within the subpopulation of interest .
Using MCMC analysis , it was possible to combine prior distributions of the PBPK model parameters with the NHANES blood and hair data , as well as with kinetic data from controlled human exposures to MeHg , to derive posterior distributions that refine the estimates of both the population exposure distribution and the pharmacokinetic parameters .
In general , based on the populations surveyed by NHANES , the results of the MCMC analysis indicate that a small fraction , less than 1% , of the U.S. population of women of childbearing age may have mercury exposures greater than the EPA RfD for MeHg of 0.1 microg/kg/day , and that there are few , if any , exposures greater than the ATSDR MRL of 0.3 microg/kg/day .
The analysis also indicates that typical exposures may be greater than previously estimated from food consumption surveys , but that the variability in exposure within the population of U.S. women of childbearing age may be less than previously assumed .
