Many aquifers in various parts of the world have been found to be contaminated with arsenic at concentration above 0.05 mg/L .
However reports of large number of affected people in India and Bangladesh are unprecedented .
Characteristic skin lesions ( pigmentation , depigmentation and keratosis ) are the hallmark signs of chronic arsenic toxicity .
Emerging evidences show that ingestion of arsenic through drinking water may also lead to non-malignant respiratory effects .
Early report of non-malignant pulmonary effect of chronic ingestion of arsenic was available from studies in children in Chile as early as 1970 .
However on the basis of case studies , respiratory effect of chronic arsenic toxicity in adults following drinking of arsenic contaminated water in West Bengal was first reported in 1997 .
Epidemiological studies carried out in West Bengal on a population of 7683 showed that the prevalence odds ratio ( POR ) estimates were markedly increased for participants with arsenic induced skin lesions who also had high levels of arsenic in their current drinking water source ( > or = 0.5 mg/L ) compared with individuals who had normal skin and were exposed to low levels of arsenic ( < 0.05 mg/L ) .
In participants with skin lesions , age-adjusted POR estimates for chronic cough were 7.8 for females ( 95% CI:3.1-19.5 ) and 5.0 for males ( 95% CI:2.6-9.9 ) .
In Bangladesh , similar study carried out on a population of 218 showed that the crude prevalence ratio for chronic bronchitis was found to be 10.3 ( 95% CI:2.4-43.1 ) for females and 1.6 ( 95% CI:0.8-3.1 ) for males .
Reports of lung function tests were available from both hospital and population based studies .
Results show evidences of restrictive , obstructive and combined obstructive and restrictive lung disease in different people having chronic lung disease associated with chronic arsenic toxicity .
On the basis of clinical study , chest X-ray and HRCT done in Arsenicosis patients with features of chronic lung disease , the abnormalities observed were varied .
Evidences of obstructive pulmonary disease ( COPD ) , interstitial lung disease ( ILD ) and bronchiectasis were found in some of the cases .
Results of studies carried out on people showing features of Arsenicosis due to drinking arsenic contaminated water provide evidence that arsenic is a potent respiratory toxicant , even following ingestion .
