Methylmercury ( MeHg ) is one of the most hazardous substances that affects the fetus through fish consumption .
The objective of this study was to evaluate the changes in the level of exposure to MeHg by assessing the mercury ( Hg ) concentrations of the segmental hair at parturition and 3 months after parturition , and to study their correlations with the total Hg concentrations of maternal and cord red blood cells ( RBCs ) and neonatal hair as biomarkers of fetal exposure to MeHg at parturition .
In total , 40 paired samples of maternal hair from the scalp , maternal and cord RBCs , and 21 samples of neonatal hair from the scalp were collected at parturition .
In addition , 19 samples of maternal hair from the scalp were collected at 3 months after parturition .
The maternal hair samples were cut into 1cm segments from the scalp end toward the tip .
The geometric mean of the Hg concentrations in cord RBCs was approximately 1.6 times higher than that in the maternal RBCs , and a strong correlation coefficient ( r=0.91 ) was found between them .
The increase or decrease in the Hg concentrations of the segmental hair during gestation differed largely among individuals .
The correlation coefficients between the Hg concentrations of the segmental hair and cord RBCs were the strongest ( r=0.90 ) in the hair segment 1cm from the scalp and decreased gradually with the distance from the scalp .
The correlation coefficients between the Hg concentrations of the segmental hair collected at 3 months after parturition and maternal RBCs were over 0.9 in the hair segments 5 and 6 cm from the scalp , suggesting that the time required for the incorporation of Hg from the blood into a growing hair was very short .
The geometric mean of Hg concentrations in the neonatal hair at parturition was similar to that in the maternal hair 1cm from the scalp at parturition , and they exhibited a strong correlation ( r=0.95 ) .
The findings of this study indicate that maternal hair close to the scalp at parturition and neonatal hair are useful biomarkers of fetal exposure to MeHg at parturition .
In addition , the segmental maternal hair throughout gestation is essential to obtain important information on MeHg exposure during the different sensitive windows or bolus MeHg exposure during gestation .
