Gold extracted by Hg-amalgamation process , which can cause both health and environmental problems , is widespread in South East Asia including Myanmar , Laos , Cambodia , and Thailand .
Small-scale gold mining operations have been carried out since the year 2000 in Phanom Pha District , Phichit Province , Thailand .
Since no data is available for evaluating Hg exposure , an investigation of mercury ( Hg ) contamination and exposure assessment was carried out at this mine site .
Environmental monitoring illustrated the total Hg in water was as high as 4 microg/l while Hg in sediment ranged between 102 to 325 microg/kg dry weight .
Both Hg deposition from the air ( 1.28 microg/100 cm(2)/day ) and concentration in surface soil ( 20,960 microg/kg dry weight ) were elevated in the area of amalgamation .
The potential of Hg exposure to miners as well as to schoolchildren was assessed .
The concentrations of Hg in urine of 79 miners who were directly ( group I ) or indirectly ( group II ) involved in the gold recovery operation were 32.02 and 20.04 microg/g creatinine , respectively , which did not exceed regulatory limits ( 35 microg/g creatinine ) .
Hair Hg levels in both groups ( group I and group II ) also were not significantly higher than the non-exposed group .
In terms of risk factors , gender and nature of food preparation and consumption were the two significant variables influencing the concentration of Hg in urine of miners ( P < 0.05 ) .
A hazard quotient ( HQ ) was estimated based on the inorganic Hg exposure of individual miners .
The HQ values of group I were in a range 16 to 218 times higher than the safety level set as 1 .
By comparison the group II HQ index was very low ( 0.03-0.39 ) .
The miners in group I who worked and ate food from this area experienced potentially high exposure to Hg associated with the mining process .
In a second Hg exposure assessment , a group of 59 schoolchildren who attended an elementary school near the gold mine site was evaluated for Hg exposure .
A slightly higher Hg urine concentration was detected in group I and group II ( involved and not involved in gold recovery ) at average levels of 15.82 and 9.95 microg/g creatinine , respectively .
The average Hg values for both groups were below the established levels indicating no risk from Hg intake .
Average Hg hair level in all schoolchildren ( 0.93 microg/g ) was not significantly higher than reference group .
There were two variables ( gender and personal hygiene ) which affected the concentration of Hg in urine of schoolchildren ( P < 0.05 ) .
The result ( HQ ) also suggested that schoolchildren were not at risk ( < 1 ) .
Schoolchildren involved in gold mining activities showed some indirect exposure to Hg from the adults working in mining area .
