In the days following the collapse of the World Trade Center ( WTC ) towers on September 11 , 2001 ( 9/11 ) , the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) initiated numerous air monitoring activities to better understand the ongoing impact of emissions from that disaster .
Using these data , EPA conducted an inhalation exposure and human health risk assessment to the general population .
This assessment does not address exposures and potential impacts that could have occurred to rescue workers , firefighters , and other site workers , nor does it address exposures that could have occurred in the indoor environment .
Contaminants evaluated include particulate matter ( PM ) , metals , polychlorinated biphenyls , dioxins , asbestos , volatile organic compounds , particle-bound polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons , silica , and synthetic vitreous fibers ( SVFs ) .
This evaluation yielded three principal findings .
( 1 ) Persons exposed to extremely high levels of ambient PM and its components , SVFs , and other contaminants during the collapse of the WTC towers , and for several hours afterward , were likely to be at risk for acute and potentially chronic respiratory effects .
( 2 ) Available data suggest that contaminant concentrations within and near ground zero ( GZ ) remained significantly elevated above background levels for a few days after 9/11 .
Because only limited data on these critical few days were available , exposures and potential health impacts could not be evaluated with certainty for this time period .
( 3 ) Except for inhalation exposures that may have occurred on 9/11 and a few days afterward , the ambient air concentration data suggest that persons in the general population were unlikely to suffer short-term or long-term adverse health effects caused by inhalation exposures .
While this analysis by EPA evaluated the potential for health impacts based on measured air concentrations , epidemiological studies conducted by organizations other than EPA have attempted to identify actual impacts .
Such studies have identified respiratory effects in worker and general populations , and developmental effects in newborns whose mothers were near GZ on 9/11 or shortly thereafter .
While researchers are not able to identify specific times and even exactly which contaminants are the cause of these effects , they have nonetheless concluded that exposure to WTC contaminants ( and/or maternal stress , in the case of developmental effects ) resulted in these effects , and have identified the time period including 9/11 itself and the days and few weeks afterward as a period of most concern based on high concentrations of key pollutants in the air and dust .
