A conceptual/computational framework for exposure reconstruction from biomarker data combined with auxiliary exposure-related data is presented , evaluated with example applications , and examined in the context of future needs and opportunities .
This framework employs physiologically based toxicokinetic ( PBTK ) modeling in conjunction with numerical " inversion " techniques .
To quantify the value of different types of exposure data " accompanying " biomarker data , a study was conducted focusing on reconstructing exposures to chlorpyrifos , from measurements of its metabolite levels in urine .
The study employed biomarker data as well as supporting exposure-related information from the National Human Exposure Assessment Survey ( NHEXAS ) , Maryland , while the MENTOR-3P system ( Modeling ENvironment for TOtal Risk with Physiologically based Pharmacokinetic modeling for Populations ) was used for PBTK modeling .
Recently proposed , simple numerical reconstruction methods were applied in this study , in conjunction with PBTK models .
Two types of reconstructions were studied using ( a ) just the available biomarker and supporting exposure data and ( b ) synthetic data developed via augmenting available observations .
Reconstruction using only available data resulted in a wide range of variation in estimated exposures .
Reconstruction using synthetic data facilitated evaluation of numerical inversion methods and characterization of the value of additional information , such as study-specific data that can be collected in conjunction with the biomarker data .
Although the NHEXAS data set provides a significant amount of supporting exposure-related information , especially when compared to national studies such as the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey ( NHANES ) , this information is still not adequate for detailed reconstruction of exposures under several conditions , as demonstrated here .
The analysis presented here provides a starting point for introducing improved designs for future biomonitoring studies , from the perspective of exposure reconstruction ; identifies specific limitations in existing exposure reconstruction methods that can be applied to population biomarker data ; and suggests potential approaches for addressing exposure reconstruction from such data .
