The exposure of pregnant women and young children to environmental pollutants is an ongoing concern of state and local public health departments .
Of primary concern is the exposure to lead in lead-based paints , methyl mercury in contaminated fish and cadmium present at mining sites .
The feasibility , utility and methodology of using blood spot cards collected for new born health screening purposes was studied for use in conducting routine state-wide surveillance of blood lead , mercury and cadmium levels in infants .
Homogeneity of different lots of blank filter paper was examined .
Mass measurements ( weights ) of filter paper punches were taken across three different lots of filter paper .
Statistical analysis of the data was performed using one-way ANOVA , which indicated no significant difference in the means of all three lots , but high variances were noted .
The three metals were examined in three different lots of filter papers purchased from the manufacturer .
The lots had measurable amounts of cadmium and lead , but not mercury .
Lead spike values were observed for roughly about 7% of the blank samples , indicating heterogeneous distribution of this metal .
Statistical analysis of the data was also performed using a two-way ANOVA calculation with Tukey's pairwise comparisons .
The results found that total mean metal loadings across the three lots were different .
The concentration of the metals can be different from each other and the concentration of any one metal can differ across lots .
Stability at different concentrations of the heavy metals in blood spotted onto filter paper with time and storage conditions was examined .
Results indicate acceptable performance for at least 8.5 months for lead ( near CDC's concern level ) and for mercury ( near NRC's concern level ) .
The filter paper and blood spots were analyzed for metals using an acid extraction , followed by analysis using an inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer ( ICP-MS ) .
Blood spot cards were studied from four different states across the Rocky Mountain region .
Internal blank punches adjacent to the blood spot and actual dried spot punches from the same card were analyzed simultaneously .
The blank punch indicated the amount of contamination present in the blood spot sample .
Statistical analysis of the data was performed using MANOVA followed by calculations for each metal separately .
This method was found to be suitable for assessing maternal exposure to lead and mercury using residual newborn screening specimens .
Additional research into the applicability for cadmium is needed .
Because of the intrinsic problem of contamination from the skin surface of capillary blood samples or other internal or extraneous sources , automatic re-analysis of elevated results assures minimal false positives are reported .
