Increased exposure to the flame retardants known as polybrominated diphenyl ethers ( PBDEs ) may be expected to occur during the recycling of polyurethane foam containing these chemicals .
To date , no studies in the United States have investigated occupational exposure to these flame retardants during recycling processes .
The objective of the present study was to determine if individuals working in foam recycling facilities , and/or carpet installers who may install carpet padding manufactured from recycled foam , possess significantly higher PBDE serum levels relative to that of the general U.S. population .
As a control group , serum was collected from four spouses and one clerical worker .
In addition , levels in workers were also compared to the recently published national health and nutrition examination survey ( NHANES ) data set on PBDEs in the general U.S. population .
Serum samples were collected in duplicate and analyzed by two different laboratories as quality control .
Total PBDE levels were found to be significantly higher ( p < 0.05 ) in the individuals recycling foam and installing carpet ( n = 15 ) relative to the control group ( n = 5 ) .
Median sigmaPBDE levels in the foam recyclers , carpet layers , and control group were 160 , 178 , and 19 ng/g lipid , respectively .
In contrast , concentrations of a polybrominated biphenyl ( BB-153 ) and a polychlorinated biphenyl ( CB-153 ) were equivalent among all groups tested .
The PBDE congeners BDE-47 , 99 , 100 , and 153 contributed 90% of the sigmaPBDE concentration in serum and no differences in congener patterns were apparent among the different groups .
Relative to concentrations measured in the NHANES , foam recyclers and carpet layers have body burdens that are an order of magnitude higher .
These data suggest individuals recycling foam-containing products , and/ or using products manufactured from recycled foam ( i.e. , carpet padding ) , have higher body burdens of PBDEs , and thus may be at higher risk from adverse health effects associated with brominated flame retardant exposure .
