Polybrominated diphenyl ethers ( PBDEs ) have been used as flame retardants in foams , fabrics and plastics , and are common contaminants of household air and dust and bioaccumulate in wildlife , and are detectable in human tissues and in fish and animal food products .
In the Great Lakes Basin sport fish consumption has been demonstrated to be an important source of PCB and DDE exposure .
PBDEs are present in the same sport fish but prior to our study the contribution to human PBDE body burdens from Great Lakes sport fish consumption had not been investigated .
This study was designed to assess PBDE , PCB and 1,1-bis(4-chlorophenyl)-2,2-dichloroethene ( DDE ) serum concentrations in an existing cohort of 508 frequent and infrequent consumers of sport-caught fish living in five Great Lake states .
BDE congeners 47 and 99 were identified in the majority of blood samples , 98% and 62% respectively. summation operatorPBDE levels were positively associated with age , hours spent outdoors , DDE , summation operatorPCB , years of sportfish consumption , and catfish and shellfish intake , and negatively associated with income and recent weight loss .
Other dietary components collected were not predictive of measured summation operatorPBDE levels .
In multivariate models , summation operatorPBDE levels were positively associated with age , years consuming sport fish , shellfish meals , and computer use and negatively associated with recent weight loss .
Having summation operatorPBDE levels in the highest quintile was independently associated with older age , male gender , consumption of catfish and shellfish , computer use and spending less time indoors. summation operatorPCB and DDE were strongly associated suggesting common exposure routes .
The association between summation operatorPBDE and summation operatorPCB or DDE was much weaker and modeling suggested more diverse PBDE sources with few identified multi-contaminant-shared exposure routes .
In our cohort Great Lakes sport fish consumption does not contribute strongly to PBDE exposure .
