The objective of this study was to evaluate the quantitative relation between measured red blood cell acetylcholinesterase ( RBC AChE ) and plasma butyrylcholinesterase ( BuChE ) activities with exposure to chlorpyrifos ( CPF ) as assessed by measurement of urinary 3,5,6-trichloro-2-pyridinol ( TCPy ) in a study group of workers occupationally exposed in the manufacture of CPF and a referent group of chemical manufacturing workers .
Measures of plasma BuChE and RBC AChE activity and urinary TCPy concentration collected over a year-long study ( 1999-2000 ) in CPF-exposed workers ( n=53 ) and referents ( n=60 ) were analyzed using linear mixed models to characterize exposure-response relationships .
Intraindividual variability in cholinesterase measures was compared between CPF-exposed workers and referents .
Urinary TCPy concentrations in CPF workers were substantially elevated compared to referents , with median and 95th percentile concentrations during typical employment conditions 10-fold and more than 30-fold higher , respectively , than corresponding measures in the referents .
Intraindividual variability in cholinesterase activities was substantial , with 17% of unexposed referents experiencing one or more plasma BuChE measures more than 20% below baseline over a year of repeated , periodic measurements .
RBC AChE activity , an early biomarker of effect , was unrelated to urinary TCPy concentration over the entire range of exposure , up to 1000 microg TCPy/g creatinine ( Cr ) .
Plasma BuChE activity , a non-adverse biomarker of exposure , was negatively related to urinary TCPy concentrations above approximately 110 microg TCPy/g Cr .
No-effect levels for inhibition of plasma BuChE and RBC AChE corresponding to absorbed doses of CPF of approximately 5 and greater than 50 microg/kg/day , respectively , were identified .
These findings are consistent with previous no-effect level determinations for ChE inhibition in humans and suggest that general population CPF exposure levels are substantially below the identified no-effect levels .
The dose-response relationships observed in this study are consistent with predictions from the previously published physiologically based pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic model for CPF .
Intraindividual variability in measured cholinesterase activities in referents was substantial , suggesting that ongoing monitoring programs may have a substantial rate of false positives .
