Mercury is toxic to the kidney , and dental amalgam is a source of mercury exposure .
Few studies have evaluated the effects of dental amalgam on kidney function in a longitudinal context in children .
Here , we evaluated urinary concentrations of glutathione S-transferases ( GSTs ) alpha and pi as biomarkers of renal proximal and distal tubular integrity , respectively , and albumin as a biomarker of glomerular integrity in children and adolescents 8-18 years of age over a 7-year course of dental amalgam treatment .
Five hundred seven children , 8-12 years of age at baseline , participated in a clinical trial to evaluate the neurobehavioral and renal effects of dental amalgam in children .
Subjects were randomized to either dental amalgam or resin composite treatments .
Urinary GSTs alpha and pi , albumin , and creatinine concentrations were measured at baseline and annually in all subjects .
Results were evaluated using linear regression analysis .
GST-alpha concentrations were similar between treatment groups and in each sex and race ( white vs. non-white ) group in each follow-up year .
GST-pi levels tended upward over the course of follow-up by four- to six-fold .
This increase was seen in all groups irrespective of the treatment , race , or gender .
Females had GST-pi levels approximately twice those of males at all ages .
Albumin concentrations were constant throughout the follow-up period and did not differ by treatment , although females had 39% higher albumin levels than males .
Additionally , we found no significant effects of amalgam treatment on the proportion of children with microalbuminuria ( >30 mg/g creatinine ) .
These findings are relevant within the context of children's health risk assessment as relates to the safety of mercury exposure from dental amalgam on kidney function .
These data also provide normative values for sensitive indices of renal functional integrity that may serve in the evaluation of children and adolescents with renal disorders .
