The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention released its third set of nationally representative data on serum levels of polychlorinated dibenzodioxins ( PCDDs ) , polychlorinated dibenzofurans ( PCDFs ) , and non-ortho and coplanar polychlorinated biphenyls ( PCBs ) in the United States collected during the 2003-2004 sampling period as part of the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey ( NHANES ) .
We utilize the serum PCDD/F data from the three NHANES sampling periods spanning 1999-2004 to assess whether there are discernable temporal trends in the United States , either for the overall population or by age .
We also compare population serum data to biomonitoring equivalents ( BEs ) derived for PCDDs/Fs/PCBs ; BEs are estimates of the concentration of PCDD/Fs/PCBs corresponding to existing exposure guidance values estimated by various governmental agencies .
The serum PCDD/F data from 1999 to 2004 provide evidence that levels in the US population are declining , mirroring international trends , although the lower levels are principally observable in the 2003-2004 time period .
Examining the trend by population age , from the 1999 to 2004 , PCDD/F serum levels decreased by 56% for the 12-to 19-year-old group and by 38% for the 20-to 39-year olds .
A slight nonsignificant decrease was observed for 40-to 59-year olds and a slight significant increase was found for 60+ year olds .
Interpretation of the data across time is complicated by certain aspects of the data unique to the various sampling time periods ; thus , caution should be exercised when evaluating trend information .
The population mean PCDD/F/PCB TEQ is approximately equal to the BE based on the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry's Minimum Risk Level and is approximately 2-4 times lower than the remaining BEs , placing the population mean at the border between medium and low priority levels .
However , certain segments of the population have levels at the medium/high priority level ( e.g. , the 95th percentiles for ages 60 years and older ) .
