The occurrence of perfluorinated compounds ( PFCs ) in human blood is known to be widespread ; nevertheless , the sources of exposure to humans , including infants , are not well understood .
In this study , breast milk collected from seven countries in Asia was analyzed ( n=184 ) for nine PFCs , including perfluorooctanesulfonate ( PFOS ) and perfluorooctanoate ( PFOA ) .
In addition , five brands of infant formula ( n=21 ) and 11 brands of dairy milk ( n=12 ) collected from retail stores in the United States were analyzed , for comparison with PFC concentrations previously reported for breast milk from the U.S. PFOS was the predominant PFC detected in almost all Asian breast milk samples , followed by perfluorohexanesulfonate ( PFHxS ) and PFOA .
Median concentrations of PFOS in breast milk from Asian countries varied significantly;the lowest concentration of 39.4 pg/mL was found in India , and the highest concentration of 196 pg/mL was found in Japan .
The measured concentrations were similarto or less than the concentrations previously reported from Sweden , the United States , and Germany ( median , 106-166 pg/mL ) .
PFHxS was found in more than 70% of the samples analyzed from Japan , Malaysia , Philippines , and Vietnam , at mean concentrations ranging from 6.45 ( Malaysia ) to 15.8 ( Philippines ) pg/mL PFOA was found frequently only in samples from Japan ; the mean concentration for that country was 77.7 pg/mL .
None of the PFCs were detected in the infant-formula or dairy-milk samples from the U.S. except a few samples that contained concentrations close to the limit of detection .
The estimated average daily intake of PFOS by infants from seven Asian countries , via breastfeeding , was 11.8 +/- 10.6 ng/kg bw/ day ; this value is 7-12 times higher than the estimated adult dietary intakes previously reported from Germany , Canada , and Spain .
The average daily intake of PFOA by Japanese infants was 9.6 +/- 4.9 ng/kg bw/day , a value 3-10 times greater than the estimated adult dietary intakes reported from Germany and Canada .
The highest estimated daily intakes of PFOS and PFOA by infants from seven Asian countries studied were 1-2 orders of magnitude below the tolerable daily intake values recommended by the U.K. Food Standards Agency .
