Environmental pollution arising from electronic waste ( e-waste ) disposal and recycling has received considerable attention in recent years .
Treatment , at low temperatures , of e-wastes that contain polyvinylchloride and related polymers can release polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans ( PCDD/Fs ) .
Although several studies have reported trace metals and polybrominated diphenyl ethers ( PBDEs ) released from e-waste recycling operations , environmental contamination and human exposure to PCDD/Fs from e-waste recycling operations are less well understood .
In this study , electronic shredder waste and dust dust from e-waste facilities , and leaves and surface soil collected in the vicinity of a large scale e-waste recycling facility in Taizhou , Eastern China , were analyzed for total PCDD/ Fs including 2,3,7,8-substituted congeners .
We also determined PCDD/Fs in surface agricultural soils from several provinces in China for comparison with soils from e-waste facilities .
Concentrations of total PCDD/Fs were high in all of the matrices analyzed and ranged from 30.9 to 11400 pg/g for shredder waste , 3460 to 9820 pg/g dry weight for leaves , 2560 to 148000 pg/g dry weight for workshop-floor dust , and 854 to 10200 pg/g dry weight for soils .
We also analyzed surface soils from a chemical industrial complex ( a coke-oven plant , a coal-fired power plant , and a chlor-alkali plant ) in Shanghai .
Concentrations of total PCDD/Fs in surface soil ( 44.5-531 pg/g dry wt ) from the chemical industrial complex were lower than the concentrations found in soils from e-waste recycling plants , but higher than the concentrations found in agricultural soils .
Agricultural soils from six cities in China contained low levels ( 3.44-33.8 pg/g dry wt ) of total PCDD/Fs .
Profiles of dioxin toxic equivalents ( TEQs ) of 2,3,7,8-PCDD/Fs in soils from e-waste facilities in Taizhou differed from the profiles found in agricultural soils .
The estimated daily intakes of TEQs of PCDD/ Fs via soil/dust dust ingestion and dermal exposure ( 2.3 and 0.363 pg TEQ/kg bw/day for children and adults , respectively ) were 2 orders of magnitude higher in people at e-waste recycling facilities than in people at the chemical industrial site ( 0.021 and 0.0053 pg TEQ/kg bw/day for children and adults , respectively ) , implying greater health risk for humans from dioxin exposures at e-waste recycling facilities .
The calculated TEQ exposures for e-waste workers from dust dust and soil ingestion alone were 2-3 orders of magnitude greater than the exposures from soils in reference locations .
