A mercury-cell chlor-alkali plant operated in Estarreja ( North-western Portugal ) for 50 years causing widespread environmental contamination .
Although production by this process ceased in 2002 , mercury contamination from the plant remains significant .
The main objective of this study was to investigate mercury impact on the nearby environment and potential risks to local population .
To assess the level of contamination soil samples were collected from agricultural fields in the vicinity of the plant , extending the study by taking samples of the predominant vegetation suitable for animal and human consumption , water samples , and fish species from a nearby coastal lagoon , to gain a preliminary insight into the potential for contamination of the terrestrial and aquatic food web .
To determine population exposure to mercury , hair samples were collected from local residents .
Total mercury concentration in the 0-15 cm layer of soil was found to be highly variable , ranging between 0.010 and 91 mg kg(-1) , although mercury contamination of soils was found to be restricted to a confined area .
Lolium perenne roots contained between 0.0070 and 2.0 mg kg(-1) , and there is evidence that root systems uptake mercury from the soil .
Levels of mercury in the aerial parts of plants ranged between 0.018 and 0.98 mg kg(-1) .
It appears that plants with higher mercury concentration in soils and roots also display higher mercury concentration in leaves .
Total mercury concentration in water samples ranged between 12 and 846 ng L(-1) , all samples presenting concentrations below the maximum level allowable for drinking water defined in the Portuguese law ( 1.0 microg L(-1) ) .
Mercury levels in fish samples were below the maximum limit defined in the Portuguese law ( 0.5 mg kg(-1) ) , ranging from 0.0040 to 0.24 mg kg(-1) .
Vegetables collected presented maximum mercury concentration of 0.17 mg kg(-1) .
In general , food is not contaminated and should not be responsible for major human exposure to the metal .
Mercury determined in human hair samples ( 0.090-4.2 mg kg(-1) ; mean 1.5 mg kg(-1) ) can be considered within normal limits , according to WHO guidelines suggesting that it is not affecting the local population .
Despite being subject to decades of mercury emissions , nowadays this pollutant is only found in limited small areas and must not constitute a risk for human health , should these areas be restricted and monitored .
Considering the present data , it appears that the population from Estarreja is currently not being affected by mercury levels that still remain in the environment .
