The main objectives of our study were to estimate the impact of a mercury cell chlor-alkali ( MCCA ) complex in Rosignano Solvay ( Tuscany , Italy ) on the local environment and to assess mercury exposure of inhabitants living near the plant .
Measurement campaigns of atmospheric Hg near the MCCA plant showed that the impact of the emitted Hg from the industry on the terrestrial environment is restricted to a close surrounding area .
Total gaseous mercury concentrations in ambient air of inhabited area around the MCCA plant were in the range of 8.0-8.7 ng/m3 in summer and 2.8-4.2 ng/m3 in winter .
Peaks of up to 100 ng/m3 were observed at particular meteorological conditions .
Background levels of 2 ng/m3 were reached within a radius of 3 km from the plant .
Reactive gaseous mercury emissions from the plant constituted around 4.2% of total gaseous mercury and total particulate mercury emission constituted around 1.0% of total gaseous mercury emitted .
Analysis of local vegetables and soil samples showed relatively low concentrations of total mercury ( 30.1-2919 microgHg/kg DW in the soil ; <0.05-111 microgHg/kg DW in vegetables ) and methylmercury ( 0.02-3.88 microgHg/kg DW in the soil ; 0.03-1.18 microgHg/kg DW in vegetables ) .
Locally caught marine fish and fresh marine fish from the local market had concentrations of total Hg from 0.049 to 2.48 microgHg/g FW , of which 37-100% were in the form of methylmercury. 19% of analysed fish exceeded 1.0 microgHg/g FW level , which is a limit set by the European Union law on Hg concentrations in edible marine species for tuna , swordfish and shark , while 39% of analysed fish exceeded the limit of 0.5 microgHg/g FW set for all other edible marine species .
Risk assessment performed by calculating ratio of probable daily intake ( PDI ) and provisional tolerable daily intake ( PTDI ) for mercury species for various exposure pathways showed no risks to human health for elemental and inorganic mercury , except for some individuals with higher number of amalgam fillings , while PDI/PTDI ratio for methylmercury and total mercury exceeded the toxicologically tolerable value due to the potential consumption of contaminated marine fish .
