INTRODUCTION The property of mercury to amalgamate with other metals is used to create a material for filling teeth .
This material remains the cheapest and most efficient in tooth restoration .
Mercurial toxicity has been documented since Antiquity but the metal remains widely used in some countries .
This study compared mercury impregnation in dentists and dental assistants in Monastir ( Tunisia ) to another population not exposed professionally .
SUBJECTS AND METHODS A cross-sectional study was made on 52 dentists and dental assistants working in private offices and in the stomatology unit of the Monastir teaching hospital , with a control group of 52 physicians and nurses working in the Monastir Fattouma Bourguiba hospital .
The groups were paired according to age and gender .
The study lasted three months .
A questionnaire investigated the socioprofessional features of the study population , non professional mercury exposure , work environment , the various amalgam handling and preparation techniques , and preventive hygiene measures .
Urinary and salivary sampling was performed so as to prevent any accidental mercurial contamination .
Mercury level was assessed by atomic absorption spectroscopy in an automatic sampler , urine creatinine with Jaffé's colorimetric reaction .
The results of mercury level assessment were expressed in microg/g of creatinine , salivary mercury in mug/l .
The statistical analysis was made with the Epi.info 6 software .
Khi(2) and Fisher tests were used to compare qualitative variables .
The ANOVA test was used to compare averages with a statistic significance threshold at 0.05 .
RESULTS Sixty-one percent of individuals with risk exposure worked in a dental clinic .
Bruxism and onychophagia were more important in the control group with a significant statistical difference ( respectively , p=0.01 and p<0.0001 ) .
The urinary and salivary mercury levels were significantly increased in the exposed group , with respective values of 20.4+/-42.4microg/g of creatinine and 10.6+/-13.02microg/l versus 0.04+/-0.3microg/g of creatinine and 0microg/l in the control group .
Disposing of amalgam waste was inadequate in 94% of the cases .
The variation of mercury in urine was significantly influenced by the presence of fabric curtains ( p=0.04 ) .
Eating lunch at meals at the work place was also linked to a significant increase of mercury levels in urine ( p=0.04 ) .
The storage mode of mercury in open containers was a significant factor for variation of mercury level ( p=0.03 ) .
DISCUSSION Most dentists ' private offices in Monastir do not comply or comply weakly with prevention measures linked to risk of mercury poisoning .
Awareness campaigns were launched as well as actions for the improvement of work conditions : efficient aspiration of offices containing fixed sources of mercury , adequate storage of mercury and waste , and compliance to occupational hygiene rules .
