Yusho PCB poisoning occurred in 1968 , when the human environment had been polluted with PCBs and related compounds .
The causal rice oil was contaminated with large amounts of PCBs and PCDFs by accidental leakage at the rice oil producing Kanemi Company on February 7-15 , 1968 .
Much less concentrations of PCBs were identified in the rice oil produced and shipped from the Company before and after the critical days .
Concentration trend of PCBs and TEQ in human body were examined for 40 years from 1968 to present .
Concentrations in the blood of heavily exposed Yusho patients and normal Japanese were PCBs : 80 and 1.5 microg/g-fat , and TEQ : 60 and 0.1 ng/g-fat , respectively , in 1969 , and decreased to PCBs : 1 and 0.2 microg/g-fat , and TEQ : 0.5 and 0.02 ng/g-fat , respectively , in 2007 .
PCBs and PCDFs have been persistently retained in human body for 40 years .
Serious cases of Yusho and Yucheng having very high PCB , PCDF concentrations in blood have suffered from severe chloracne , pigmentation , eye discharge and others at the first stage and recovered very slowly with a lapse of several years .
However , their hormone mediated signs and symptoms , such as high triglyceride and thyroxin levels in serum , disorder of immunoglobulin , goiter , decrease of sperm mobility , disorder of teeth and joints conditions , decrease of IQ score in children , headache and numbness , etc , are persisting for more than 30 years .
The residents in East Slovakia who have been exposed to PCBs wasted from a PCB factory and have about 3 times higher blood PCB concentrations than the controls , have suffered from disorder of FT4 and T3 levels in serum , disorder of thyroid grand and thymus , dental defects in enamel developmental , hearing impairment at low frequency tone , tendency to diabetes and others .
Residents in the Great Lakes area , USA , whose blood PCB levels are estimated to be higher than other places , have shown disorder of thyroid , T4 , TSH levels , endometriosis , joint disorder , and low IQ score in children .
The levels of PCBs and PCDFs in the blood of Yusho patients and Controls are compared to the normal levels of estradiol , testosterone and thyroxin .
In the blood of Yusho patients , concentrations of single congeners of PCB118 , PCB153 , PCB156 and PentaCDF are high enough to disturb the hormonal effects .
Blood PCB concentrations in normal Japanese are higher than the FT3 and FT4 levels , indicating hormonal disturbance will be easily produced .
PCBs are metabolized to produce HO-PCBs , which bind to TTR and retain in blood medium .
Blood HO-PCB concentrations in Yusho patients and normal persons are higher than the FT3 , FT4 levels in serum .
Therefore , the hormonal effects of thyroxin will be disturbed in Yusho and normal persons .
As HO-PCB will be easily transferred to fetus through placenta , fetus development will be possible to be disturbed .
In Yusho and other cases , PCBs and TEQ ( PentaCDF , PCB118 etc ) were ingested together and the strong enzyme inducers of PentaCDF and others have metabolized PCBs to HO-PCBs , which have retained in the blood .
Complex reactions of PCDFs , PCBs and HO-PCBs have disturbed the hormonal effects and the induced symptoms and diseases would have been caused .
