When working with hot mix asphalt , road pavers are exposed to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons ( PAHs ) through the inhalation of vapors and particulate matter ( PM ) and through dermal contact with PM and contaminated surfaces .
Several PAHs with four to six rings are potent carcinogens which reside in these particulate emissions .
Since urinary biomarkers of large PAHs are rarely detectable in asphalt workers , attention has focused upon urinary levels of the more volatile and abundant two-ring and three-ring PAHs as potential biomarkers of PAH exposure .
Here , we compare levels of particulate polycyclic aromatic compounds ( P-PACs , a group of aromatic hydrocarbons containing PAHs and heterocyclic compounds with four or more rings ) in air and dermal patch samples from 20 road pavers to the corresponding urinary levels of naphthalene ( U-Nap ) ( two rings ) , phenanthrene ( U-Phe ) ( three rings ) , monohydroxylated metabolites of naphthalene ( OH-Nap ) and phenanthrene ( OH-Phe ) , and 1-hydroxypyrene ( OH-Pyr ) ( four rings ) , the most widely used biomarker of PAH exposure .
For each worker , daily breathing-zone air ( n = 55 ) and dermal patch samples ( n = 56 ) were collected on three consecutive workdays along with postshift , bedtime , and morning urine samples ( n = 149 ) .
Measured levels of P-PACs and the urinary analytes were used to statistically model exposure-biomarker relationships while controlling for urinary creatinine , smoking status , age , body mass index , and the timing of urine sampling .
Levels of OH-Phe in urine collected postshift , at bedtime , and the following morning were all significantly associated with levels of P-PACs in air and dermal patch samples .
For U-Nap , U-Phe , and OH-Pyr , both air and dermal patch measurements of P-PACs were significant predictors of postshift urine levels , and dermal patch measurements were significant predictors of bedtime urine levels ( all three analytes ) and morning urine levels ( U-Nap and OH-Pyr only ) .
Significant effects of creatinine concentration were observed for all analytes , and modest effects of smoking status and body mass index were observed for U-Phe and OH-Pyr , respectively .
Levels of OH-Nap were not associated with P-PAC measurements in air or dermal patch samples but were significantly affected by smoking status , age , day of sample collection , and urinary creatinine .
We conclude that U-Nap , U-Phe , OH-Phe , and OH-Pyr can be used as biomarkers of exposure to particulate asphalt emissions , with OH-Phe being the most promising candidate .
Indications that levels of U-Nap , U-Phe , and OH-Pyr were significantly associated with dermal patch measurements well into the evening after a given work shift , combined with the small ratios of within-person variance components to between-person variance components at bedtime , suggest that bedtime measurements may be useful for investigating dermal PAH exposures .
