Arsenic is naturally associated with gold mineralisation and elevated in some soils and mine waste around historical gold mining activity in Victoria , Australia .
To explore uptake , arsenic concentrations in children's toenail clippings and household soils were measured , and the microdistribution and speciation of arsenic in situ in toenail clipping thin sections investigated using synchrotron-based X-ray microprobe techniques .
The ability to differentiate exogenous arsenic was explored by investigating surface contamination on cleaned clippings using depth profiling , and direct diffusion of arsenic into incubated clippings .
Total arsenic concentrations ranged from 0.15 to 2.1 microg/g ( n=29 ) in clipping samples and from 3.3 to 130 microg/g ( n=22 ) in household soils , with significant correlation between transformed arsenic concentrations ( Pearson's r=0.42 , P=0.023 ) when household soil was treated as independent .
In clipping thin sections ( n=2 ) , X-ray fluorescence ( XRF ) mapping showed discrete layering of arsenic consistent with nail structure , and irregular arsenic incorporation along the nail growth axis .
Arsenic concentrations were heterogeneous at 10x10 microm microprobe spot locations investigated ( <0.1 to 13.3 microg/g ) .
X-ray absorption near-edge structure ( XANES ) spectra suggested the presence of two distinct arsenic species : a lower oxidation state species , possibly with mixed sulphur and methyl coordination ( denoted As(approximately III)(-S , -CH3) ) ; and a higher oxidation state species ( denoted As(approximately V)(-O) ) .
Depth profiling suggested that surface contamination was unlikely ( n=4 ) , and XRF and XANES analyses of thin sections of clippings incubated in dry or wet mine waste , or untreated , suggested direct diffusion of arsenic occurred under moist conditions .
These findings suggest that arsenic in soil contributes to some systemic absorption associated with periodic exposures among children resident in areas of historic gold mining activity in Victoria , Australia .
Future studies are required to ascertain if adverse health effects are associated with current levels of arsenic uptake .
