Chronic exposure to arsenic compounds is one of the major public-health problems in many developing and some developed countries .
The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of chronic exposure to arsenic on dermatological lesions , hypertension , and chromosomal abnormalities among people in a community in the northwest of Iran .
The occurrence of dermatological lesions , hypertension , and chromosomal abnormalities was investigated in two groups : Ghopuz village , including 101 subjects with chronic exposure to arsenic in drinking-water and Mayan village , including 107 subjects with no exposure .
Daily/yearly absorbed amounts of arsenic were calculated for all subjects .
Cumulative arsenic index for each individual was then estimated on the basis of age , water consumption , and location of residence .
Arsenic concentration in drinking-water sources in Ghopuz and Mayan villages was 1031 +/- 1103 microg/L and non-detectable respectively .
The mean systolic blood pressure in the exposure group [ n=137 , 95% confidence interval ( CI 132-142) ] was significantly higher than that in the control group ( n=107 , 95% CI 99.9-114 ) .
A similar significant difference was observed for diastolic blood pressure ( exposed : n=82 , 95% CI 79-85 vs non-exposed : n=71 , 95% CI 66-75 ) .
The incidence of hyperkeratosis was 34 times higher among the exposure group compared to the control subjects [ odds ratio ( OR)=34 , p<0.001) ] .
A significant difference was also observed in the occurrence of skin-pigmentation between the two groups ( OR=2.4 , p<0.007 ) .
Location and severity of the pigmentations were statistically different between the two groups .
Twenty-five percent of the subjects in the exposure group showed chromosomal abnormalities ( p=0.05 ) .
Arsenic exposure was a serious health problem in the region .
More studies are needed to investigate the long-term effects and dose-response relationship of arsenic in the region and similar areas .
Wide-ranging monitoring programmes for drinking-water sources should be implemented by public-health authorities .
