We estimated cumulative residential pesticide exposures for a group of nine young children ( 4-6 years ) using three different methodologies developed by the US Environmental Protection Agency and compared the results with estimates derived from measured urinary metabolite concentrations .
The Standard Operating Procedures ( SOPs ) for Residential Exposure Assessment are intended to provide a screening-level assessment to estimate exposure for regulatory purposes .
Nonetheless , dermal exposure estimates were typically lower from the SOP ( 1-1300 nmol/day ) than from SHEDS ( 5-19,000 nmol/day ) or any of the four different approaches for estimating dermal exposure using the Draft Protocol for Measuring Children's Non-Occupational Exposure to Pesticides by all Relevant Pathways ( Draft Protocol ) ( 5-11,000 nmol/day ) .
Indirect ingestion exposure estimates ranged from 0.02 to 21.5 nmol/day for the SOP , 0.5 to 188 nmol/day for SHEDS , and 0 to 3.38 nmol/day for the Draft Protocol .
Estimates of total absorbed dose ranged from 3 to 37 nmol/day for the SOPs , 0.5 to 100 nmol/day for SHEDS , and 1 to 216 nmol/day for the Draft Protocol .
The concentrations estimated using the Draft Protocol and SHEDS showed strong , positive relationships with the 3-phenoxybenzoic acid metabolite measured in the children's urine samples ( R²=0.90 for the Draft Protocol ; R²=0.92 for SHEDS ) .
Analysis of different approaches for estimating dermal exposure suggested that the approach assuming an even distribution of pesticide residue on the child's body was most reasonable .
With all three methodologies providing reasonable estimates of exposure and dose , selection should depend on the available data and the objectives of the analysis .
Further research would be useful to better understand how best to estimate dermal exposure for children and what exposure factors ( e.g. , activities , transfer coefficients , measurement techniques ) are most relevant in making dermal exposure estimates .
