There is concern that the traditional diet is a source of mercury exposure among Inuit in the Canadian Arctic .
Mercury exposure in utero and in early childhood presents a risk to neurodevelopment .
The objectives of the present study were to assess the dietary mercury exposure from traditional food among Inuit children 3 to 5 years of age in Nunavut , and evaluate the association between estimated dietary mercury intake and body burden .
A cross-sectional Nunavut Inuit Child Health Survey was conducted in 2007 and 2008 which included assessment of dietary habits and children's hair mercury ( Hg ) levels .
Further , an Inuit Adult Health Survey was conducted in the same years which included assessment of dietary habits and whole blood mercury concentrations .
Traditional food samples were collected during this study and previously from the Canadian Arctic .
Daily mercury intake from traditional food was calculated .
Body mercury burden was determined using the hair mercury concentration .
The geometric mean of children's hair Hg was 0.66 \u03bcg/g and varied by region .
Nearly 25% of children had hair Hg concentrations equal to or higher than 2 \u03bcg/g ( WHO reference level ) .
There was a significant correlation between mercury levels in children's hair and that of the adults in the same household .
For children , beluga muktuk , narwhal muktuk , ringed seal liver , fish , caribou meat and ringed seal meat were the major dietary sources of mercury .
These food items together accounted for over 95% of total daily dietary mercury intake .
A positive linear regression relationship between children's hair mercury levels and estimated dietary mercury intake was observed .
Estimated intake in Baffin decreased by 30% compared to 20 years ago .
Some traditional food items were significant sources of mercury to Inuit children in Nunavut .
Although a reduction in the consumption of these diet items may be a way to reduce mercury intake , the nutritional , social and cultural benefits of traditional food and countervailing risks must be taken into account in risk mitigation .
