As jet fuel is a common occupational exposure among military and civilian populations , this study was conducted to characterize jet fuel ( JP8 ) exposure among active duty U.S. Air Force personnel .
Personnel ( n = 24 ) were divided a priori into high , moderate , and low exposure groups .
Questionnaires and personal air samples ( breathing zone ) were collected from each worker over 3 consecutive days ( 72 worker-days ) and analyzed for total hydrocarbons ( THC ) , benzene , toluene , ethylbenzene , xylenes , and naphthalene .
Air samples were collected from inside the fuel tank and analyzed for the same analytes .
Linear mixed-effects models were used to evaluate the exposure data .
Our results show that the correlation of THC ( a measure of overall JP8 inhalation exposure ) with all other analytes was moderate to strong in the a priori high and moderate exposure groups combined .
Inhalation exposure to all analytes varied significantly by self-reported JP8 exposure ( THC levels higher among workers reporting JP8 exposure ) , a priori exposure group ( THC levels in high group > moderate group > low group ) , and more specific job task groupings ( THC levels among workers in fuel systems hangar group > refueling maintenance group > fuel systems office group > fuel handling group > clinic group ) , with task groupings explaining the most between-worker variability .
Among highly exposed workers , statistically significant job task-related predictors of inhalation exposure to THC indicated that increased time in the hangar , working close to the fuel tank ( inside > less than 25 ft > greater than 25 ft ) , primary job ( entrant > attendant/runner/fireguard > outside hangar ) , and performing various tasks near the fuel tank , such as searching for a leak , resulted in higher JP8 exposure .
This study shows that while a priori exposure groups were useful in distinguishing JP8 exposure levels , job task-based categories should be considered in epidemiologic study designs to improve exposure classification .
Finally , the strong correlation of THC with naphthalene suggests that naphthalene may be an appropriate surrogate of JP8 exposure. [ Supplementary materials are available for this article .
Go to the publisher's online edition of the Journal of Occupational and Environmental Hygiene for the following free supplemental resource : a pdf file containing a table detailing concentrations of JP8 components. ] .
