BACKGROUND Air pollutants have not been associated with ambulatory electrocardiographic evidence of ST-segment depression \u2265 1 mm ( probable cardiac ischemia ) .
We previously found that markers of primary ( combustion-related ) organic aerosols and gases were positively associated with circulating biomarkers of inflammation and ambulatory blood pressure in the present cohort panel study of elderly subjects with coronary artery disease .
OBJECTIVES We specifically aimed to evaluate whether exposure markers of primary organic aerosols and ultrafine particles were more strongly associated with ST-segment depression of \u2265 1 mm than were secondary organic aerosols or PM2.5 ( particulate matter with aerodynamic diameter \u2264 2.5 µm ) mass .
METHODS We evaluated relations of air pollutants to ambulatory electrocardiographic evidence of cardiac ischemia over 10 days in 38 subjects without ST depression on baseline electrocardiographs .
Exposures were measured outdoors in retirement communities in the Los Angeles basin , including daily size-fractionated particle mass and hourly markers of primary and secondary organic aerosols and gases .
Generalized estimating equations were used to estimate odds of hourly ST-segment depression ( \u2265 1 mm ) from hourly air pollution exposures and to estimate relative rates of daily counts of ST-segment depression from daily average exposures , controlling for potential confounders .
RESULTS We found significant positive associations of hourly ST-segment depression with markers of combustion-related aerosols and gases averaged 1-hr through 3-4 days , but not secondary ( photochemically aged ) organic aerosols or ozone .
The odds ratio per interquartile increase in 2-day average primary organic carbon ( 5.2 µg/m3 ) was 15.4 ( 95% confidence interval , 3.5-68.2 ) .
Daily counts of ST-segment depression were consistently associated with primary combustion markers and 2-day average quasi-ultrafine particles < 0.25 µm .
CONCLUSIONS Results suggest that exposure to quasi-ultrafine particles and combustion-related pollutants ( predominantly from traffic ) increase the risk of myocardial ischemia , coherent with our previous findings for systemic inflammation and blood pressure .
