Phthalate exposure was found to be associated with endocrine disruption , respiratory effects , reproductive and developmental toxicity .
The intensive use of plastics may be increasing the exposure to phthalates in Taiwanese population , particularly for young children .
We studied phthalate metabolites in pregnant women and their newborns in a prospective cohort from a medical center in Central Taiwan .
One hundred maternal urine samples and 30 paired cord blood and milk samples were randomly selected from all of participants ( 430 pregnant women ) .
Eleven phthalate metabolites ( MEHP , 5OH-MEHP , 2cx-MEHP , 5cx-MEPP , 5oxo-MEHP , MiBP , MnBP , MBzP , OH-MiNP , oxo-MiNP , and cx-MiNP ) representing the exposure to five commonly used phthalates ( DEHP , di-isobutyl phthalate ( DiBP ) , DnBP , BBP , DiNP ) were measured in urine of pregnant women , cord serum and breast milk after delivery , and in urine of their children .
Exposure was estimated with excretion factors and correlation among metabolites of the same parent compound .
Thirty and 59 urinary samples from 2 and 5 years-old children were randomly selected from 185 children successfully followed .
Total urinary phthalate metabolite concentration ( geometric mean , \u03bcg L⁻¹ ) was found to be higher in 2-years-olds ( 398.6 ) and 5-years-olds ( 333.7 ) than pregnant women ( 205.2 ) .
Metabolites in urine are mainly from DEHP .
The proportion of DiNP metabolites was higher in children urine ( 4.39 and 8.31% , ages 2 and 5 ) than in adults ( 0.83% ) ( p<0.01 ) .
Compared to urinary levels , phthalate metabolite levels are low in cord blood ( 37.45 ) and milk ( 14.90 ) .
DEHP metabolite levels in women's urine and their corresponding cord blood are significantly correlated .
Compared to other populations in the world , DEHP derived metabolites in maternal urine were higher , while phthalate metabolite levels in milk and cord blood were similar .
The level of phthalate metabolites in milk and cord blood were comparable to those found in other populations .
Further studies of health effects related to DEHP and DiNP exposure are necessary for the children .
