Arsenic toxicity due to drinking of arsenic contaminated water has been one of the worst environmental health hazards .
High levels of arsenic have been reported in different natural water sources from West Bengal for more than two decades .
Groundwater contamination by arsenic and its adverse effects on the health of a big population in nine districts of West Bengal have been reported .
The problems found were mainly related to skin and respiratory , digestive , cardiovascular and nervous systems .
The respiratory effects are largely confined to those who had the skin lesion .
The present study was undertaken to evaluate the respiratory effects of exposure to different levels of arsenic in drinking water .
The water samples were collected from different tube wells and wells in the study area .
Analysis of arsenic was done by Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer with hydride generation system .
Based on the consumption of arsenic concentrations in drinking water the populations were divided into three categories , i.e. , <=50 microg/L , >50 - <= 150 microg/L and >150 microg/L .
Standard techniques of medical examination were applied to elicit signs and recorded in the pre-designed proforma .
A written consent was taken from each subject for their voluntary participation in the study. 112 subjects were investigated .
The respiratory effect was evaluated by measuring the pulmonary function test ( PFT ) .
Vital Capacity ( VC ) and Forced Vital Capacity ( FVC ) were measured by Spirovit-SP-10 ( Schiller Health Care Pvt Ltd. , Switzerland ) and Peak Expiratory Flow Rate by Wrights Peak Flow Meter ( Clement and Clarke , UK ) .
The PFT values showed gradual decrement among the males following skin pigmentation , keratosis and arsenicosis .
The respiratory function impairment among the male subjects found as restrictive type ( 26.41% ) , obstructive type ( 3.77% ) and combined type ( 7.54% ) , whereas in females only the restrictive type of impairment ( 10.16% ) was found .
Restrictive type of impairments among the subjects increased as the concentration of arsenic in drinking water increased , in males 15.78% , 29.41% and 35.29% and in females 4.54% , 5.00% and 23.52% respectively .
The pathophysiologic mechanism , by which ingested arsenic leads to impairments of lung function and increased respiratory symptoms , is yet to be understood and needs further investigation .
