The occurrence of 14 phthalate metabolites was found in human urine samples collected from seven Asian countries : China , India , Japan , Korea , Kuwait , Malaysia , and Vietnam .
Phthalate metabolites were found in all samples , indicating widespread exposure of humans to phthalates in these Asian countries .
The highest total ( the sum of 14 phthalates ) phthalate metabolite concentrations were found in samples collected from Kuwait ( median : 1050 ng/mL ) , followed in decreasing order by samples from India ( 389 ng/mL ) , China ( 234 ng/mL ) , Vietnam ( 133 ng/mL ) , Japan ( 120 ng/mL ) , Korea ( 117 ng/mL ) , and Malaysia ( 94.9 ng/mL ) .
The creatinine-adjusted median concentrations of total phthalates for urine samples from Kuwait , India , China , Vietnam , Japan , Korea , and Malaysia were 692 , 506 , 289 , 119 , 103 , 104 , and 169 \u03bcg/g creatinine , respectively .
Monomethyl phthalate ( mMP ) , monoethyl phthalate ( mEP ) , mono ( 2-isobutyl phthalate ) ( miBP ) , mono-n-butyl phthalate ( mBP ) , and metabolites of di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate ( DEHP ) were the dominant compounds , collectively accounting for >95% of the total concentrations in the samples from the seven countries .
The profiles of urinary phthalate metabolite concentrations varied among the samples collected from the seven countries .
Urine samples from Kuwait contained the highest concentrations of mEP ( median : 391 ng/mL ) , mBP ( 94.1 ng/mL ) , and the metabolites of DEHP ( 202 ng/mL ) , whereas samples from China and Japan contained the highest concentrations of miBP ( 50.8 ng/mL ) and mMP ( 17.5 ng/mL ) , respectively. mEP was the predominant metabolite in urine samples from India and Kuwait ( accounting for 49% of the total ) , mBP and miBP were the predominant compounds in samples from China ( 52% ) , and DEHP metabolites were the predominant compounds in samples from Korea ( 46% ) and Vietnam ( 52% ) .
Based on the urinary concentrations of mEP , mBP , miBP , and DEHP metabolites of the samples from the seven Asian countries , we estimated daily intake rates of diethyl phthalate ( DEP ) , dibutyl phthalate ( DBP ) , and DEHP .
The results indicated that people in the seven Asian countries are exposed to DEP , DBP , and DEHP at levels well below the reference doses ( RfD ) suggested as unsafe by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) .
The estimated exposure doses to DEHP in Kuwait , however , were above the RfD recommended by the EPA .
