BACKGROUND The Dabaoshan mine in the southeast of Guangdong Province , China , is at high risk of multi-metal pollutant discharge into a local river ( Hengshihe ) and the surrounding area .
Following approximately 30 years of exposure to these metals , little is known regarding the subsequent health effects and risks for the local residents .
In our present study , we have estimated the relationships between long-term environmental exposure to multiple heavy metals and the risk of cancer mortality in a Chinese population in the vicinity of Dabaoshan .
METHODS An ecologic study was performed .
Between 2000-2007 , a total population of 194,131 lived in the nine agricultural villages that surround the Hengshihe area .
Heavy metals concentrations were determined in local environmental samples ( water and crops ) and whole blood taken from 1152 local residents of both a high-exposure area ( HEA ) and a low-exposure area ( LEA ) .
We calculated the rate ratio and standardized mortality ratios based on age- and gender-specific cancer mortality rates for the different reference populations ( based on district , county and province ) .
Simple , multiple linear and ridge regression models were used to evaluate the associations between exposure to multiple heavy metals and cancer mortality in the nine villages , after adjustment for age and sex .
RESULTS The geometric mean blood levels of cadmium and lead were measured at 24.10 \u03bcg/L and 38.91 \u03bcg/dL for subjects ( n = 563 ) in the HEA and 1.87 \u03bcg/L and 4.46 \u03bcg/dL for subjects ( n = 589 ) from the LEA , respectively ( P < 0.001 ) .
The rate of mortality from all cancers in the HEA was substantially elevated in comparison with the corresponding mortality rate in the LEA for men ( rate ratio = 2.13 ; 95% confidence intervals = 1.63 - 2.77 ) and women ( 2.83 ; 1.91 - 4.19 ) ; rates were also significantly elevated compared with the rate when compared to the entire Wengyuan County area , or the provincial reference population .
In addition , mortality rates were significantly increased for stomach , lung and esophageal cancer in the HEA in comparison with the corresponding rates in the LEA , in Wengyuan County and the provincial reference population for men , women and both combined .
Further analysis showed that there were significantly positive correlations between exposure to cadmium and lead and the risk of all-cancers and stomach cancer mortality among women and both sexes , whilst zinc exposure showed no association with the risk of site-specific cancer mortality in the nine villages evaluated .
CONCLUSIONS The findings of this study reveal probable associations between long-term environmental exposure to both cadmium and lead and an increased risk of mortality from all cancer , as well as from stomach , esophageal and lung-cancers .
