Like arsenic ( As ) , antimony ( Sb ) is known to be a genotoxic element in vitro and in vivo .
Sb is now recognized as a global contaminant and has aroused the global concerns recently .
However , knowledge is scarce concerning the transfer of Sb from the environment to humans and the related hazards to human health .
In this pilot study , the health risk and main pathway of long-term human exposure to Sb and As for residents around Chinese Xikuangshan ( XKS ) Sb mine , the world's largest Sb mine , were evaluated by dietary exposure and hair accumulations survey .
The concentrations and species of Sb and As in food samples ( n=209 ) from three main categories and six subcategories , and in hair samples ( n=89 ) were determined .
Residents in the vicinity of XKS had an estimated dietary intake of Sb ( 554 \u03bcg/day ) which was 1.5 times higher than the tolerable daily intake ( TDI ) ( Sb , 360 \u03bcg/day ) , whereas their dietary intake of inorganic As ( 107 \u03bcg/day ) was slightly lower than the provisional tolerable weekly intake ( PTWI ) of 15 \u03bcg/kg BW/week ( equal to 129 \u03bcg As/day ) .
Hair Sb and As concentrations ( Sb , 15.7 mg/kg , DW ; As , 3.99 mg/kg , DW ) in XKS residents are both above the normal/toxic level .
Rice , vegetables ( especially leafy vegetable ) , drinking water , and meat/poultry were the dominant dietary intake sources of Sb for the residents .
In contrast , rice was the uniquely dominant dietary intake source of As .
Antimonate ( Sb(V) ) was the dominant Sb species in vegetables , drinking water and residents ' hairs .
This study highlighted the difference of exposure characteristics between Sb and As .
The preliminary results suggested that dietary exposures to Sb , rather than As , was the dominant health risk to local residents .
Nevertheless , the adverse effects of As levels on the health of residents still can not be ignored since the elevated As concentrations in human hair have reached the critical level for health risks .
In addition , this pilot study did not consider the possible Sb and As combined effects .
