The study , which measured the concentrations of Hg , Pb , Cd , Zn and As in various fish tissues ( muscle , gill and liver ) of 10 fish species ( Abramis brama danubii , Alburnus alburnus alburnus , Barbus meridionalis petenyi , Carassius auratius gibelio , Cyprinus carpio , Lepomis gibossus , Leuciscius cephalus cephalus , Perca fluviatilis fluviatilis , Rutilus rutilus , Scardinus erythrophtlalmus erythrophtlalmus ) collected in the \u0160alek lakes , is the first survey regarding metal concentrations in fish species with samples originating from Slovene lakes , while only a limited number of such studies have been carried out in southeastern Europe .
Since these lakes are situated in the close vicinity of the largest Slovene thermal power plant , the study provides an insight into the potential impact of increased levels of metals in the environment as well as an estimate of the contamination of fish tissues with metals .
Furthermore , it was possible to compare the results obtained with those from other studies regarding metal levels in freshwater fish species .
The mean metal concentrations of different tissues irrespective of species varied in the following ranges : Zn 4.31-199mg/kg ww , Pb 0.01-0.48mg/kg ww , As 0.02-0.44mg/kg ww , Hg <0.01-0.31mg/kg ww , Cd < 0.01-0.19mg/kg ww .
In general , higher contents of Hg were found in muscles and livers than in gills and higher contents of As in gills and livers than in muscles , respectively .
The accumulation of Pb and Zn was most pronounced in gills .
The result obtained regarding metal concentrations in fish revealed that the ecosystems of the \u0160alek lakes are not polluted with Hg and Pb , slightly loaded with As and Cd and moderately polluted with Zn .
In addition , the potential human health risk due to fish consumption was assessed .
This showed that the estimated weekly intakes for all metals were far below provisional permissible tolerable weekly intakes determined by WHO/FAO .
The consumption of fish from the \u0160alek lakes , therefore , does not pose a risk to human health .
