The goal of the present study is to understand the probable molecular mechanism of toxicities and the associated pathways related to observed pathophysiology in high PCB-exposed populations .
We have performed a microarray-based differential gene expression analysis of children ( mean age 46.1 months ) of Central European descent from Slovak Republic in a well-defined study cohort .
The subset of children having high blood PCB concentrations ( >75 percentile ) were compared against their low PCB counterparts ( <25 percentile ) , with mean lipid-adjusted PCB values of 3.02±1.3 and 0.06±0.03 ng/mg of serum lipid , for the two groups , respectively ( 18.1±4.4 and 0.3±0.1 ng/ml of serum ) .
The microarray was conducted with the total RNA from the peripheral blood mononuclear cells of the children using an Affymetrix platform ( GeneChip Human genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array ) and was analyzed by Gene Spring ( GX 10.0 ) .
A highly significant set of 162 differentially expressed genes between high and low PCB groups ( p value <0.00001 ) were identified and subsequently analyzed using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis tool .
The results indicate that Cell-To-Cell Signaling and Interaction , Cellular Movement , Cell Signaling , Molecular Transport , and Vitamin and Mineral Metabolism were the major molecular and cellular functions associated with the differentially altered gene set in high PCB-exposed children .
The differential gene expressions appeared to play a pivotal role in the development of probable diseases and disorders , including cardiovascular disease and cancer , in the PCB-exposed population .
The analyses also pointed out possible organ-specific effects , e.g. , cardiotoxicity , hepatotoxicity and nephrotoxicity , in high PCB-exposed subjects .
A few notable genes , such as BCL2 , PON1 , and ITGB1 , were significantly altered in our study , and the related pathway analysis explained their plausible involvement in the respective disease processes , as mentioned .
Our results provided insight into understanding the associated molecular mechanisms of complex gene-environment interactions in a PCB-exposed population .
Future endeavors of supervised genotyping of pathway-specific molecular epidemiological studies and population biomarker validations are already underway to reveal individual risk factors in these PCB-exposed populations .
