Selenium ( Se ) is an essential element and a well-known anti-oxidant .
In the Lower Tapajós River region of the Brazilian Amazon , biomarkers of Se range from normal to very high .
The local traditional diet includes important Se sources such as Brazil nuts , chicken , game meat and certain fish species .
Some studies have reported alterations in keratin structure , gastrointestinal problems and paresthesia in populations with high Se intake .
The objective of the present study was to evaluate cutaneous and garlic odor of the breath signs and sentinel symptoms of Se toxicity ( selenosis ) in relation to Se status in communities along the Tapajós River .
Participants ( N=448 ) , aged 15-87 years , were recruited from 12 communities .
Se concentrations were measured in blood ( B-Se ) and plasma ( P-Se ) by ICP-MS .
A nurse performed an examination of the hair , nails , skin and breath for signs of Se toxicity .
Interview-administered questionnaires were used to collect information on socio-demographics , medical history and possible symptoms of Se toxicity .
In this population , the median levels of B-Se and P-Se were 228.4 \u03bcg/L ( range 103.3-1500.2 \u03bcg/L ) and 134.8 \u03bcg/L ( range 53.6-913.2 \u03bcg/L ) respectively .
Although B-Se and P-Se surpassed concentrations considered toxic ( B-Se : 1000 \u03bcg/L ( U.S .
EPA , 2002) ) , no dermal or breath signs or symptoms of Se toxicity were associated with the biomarkers of Se status .
In the present study population , where Se intake is mostly from traditional diet , there is no evidence of selenosis .
These findings support the need to re-assess Se toxicity considering factors such as the chemical form of Se exposure , route of exposure ( inhaled versus ingested ) , co-exposures to toxic elements such as mercury .
Considering the current food transition towards a western diet in the Amazon , further studies should address the possible association between high Se status and cardiometabolic health in this study population .
