Prenatal mercury exposure and its fetotoxic effects may be of particular concern in urban immigrant communities as a result of possible contributing cultural factors .
The most common source of exposure in these communities is ingestion of fish and shellfish contaminated with methylmercury .
Other sources of exposure may occur in ritualistic practices associated with Hispanic and Caribbean-based religions .
This study 1 ) assessed total mercury levels in both random urine specimens from pregnant women , and in cord blood ; and 2 ) examined environmental sources of exposure from a convenience sample in a predominantly Caribbean immigrant population in Brooklyn , New York .
A questionnaire designed in collaboration with health professionals from the Caribbean community assessed the frequency of fish consumption , ritualistic practices , occupational exposures , and use of dental amalgams and mercury-containing skin and household products .
The geometric mean for total mercury in cord blood was 2.14 \u03bcg L(-1) ( 95%CI : 1.76-2.60 ) ( n = 78 ) , and 0.45 \u03bcg L(-1) ( 95%CI : 0.37-0.55 ) ( n = 183 ) in maternal urine corrected for creatinine ( \u03bcg g(-1) ) .
Sixteen percent of cord blood mercury levels exceeded the estimated equivalent of U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's Reference Dose ( 5.8 \u03bcg L(-1) blood ) .
Predictors of cord blood mercury included maternal fish consumption and foreign birth of the mother .
Predictors of urine mercury included foreign birth of the mother , number of dental amalgams , and special product use .
There were no reports of mercury use in ritualistic practices or in cosmetics ; however some women reported use of religious medals and charms .
This study characterized risk factors for mercury exposure in a sample of urban , predominantly Caribbean-born blacks .
Findings may help target interventions in this population , which might include appropriate fish selection and consumption frequency during pregnancy , and safe handling of mercury-containing products in the home .
