Environmental measurements carried out by local authorities during the 1970s , 80s and 90s in an area contaminated by hundreds of years of industrial activities have revealed high levels of zinc ( Zn ) , copper ( Cu ) , lead ( Pb ) and cadmium ( Cd ) in soil , vegetables , root crops , berries and mushrooms .
In 1972 , a large quantity of oil contaminated with polychlorinated biphenyls ( PCBs ) was accidentally spilled into the river running through the village .
To investigate the possible health effects of exposure from local sources , all cancer diagnoses , registered in 1960-2003 for individuals living in the study area , were collected from the regional cancer register of southeast Sweden .
The total cancer incidence was non-significantly decreased both among males and females as compared to national rates ( SIR=0.91 ) for each gender .
Among males , increased risks , of border-line significance , were seen for testicular cancer and lymphomas as well as significantly decreased risks for cancer in the rectum , respiratory system and brain .
Information on lifetime residence , occupation , smoking habits , diseases , childbirth and food consumption , was collected via questionnaires from cancer cases and randomly selected controls .
In both genders combined , significant associations were found for total cancer and high consumption of local perch , and for lymphomas and high consumption of both perch and pikeperch .
Female breast cancer was significantly associated with high consumption of local perch and pike as well as with work in metal production .
Mothers residing in the parish before the age of five reported significantly more preterm child deliveries .
In spite of study limitations , the results indicate that residing in a rural contaminated area may contribute to the development of certain cancers and reproductive effects .
In females , high consumption of local fish was shown to be the strongest determinant for total cancer , while in males , the strongest determinant was residing in the study area the first five years of life .
Further research including validation of exposure using biomarkers is required to verify the findings as well as future studies in other polluted areas in Sweden with larger population bases .
