BACKGROUND While exposures to urban fine particulate matter ( PM(2.5) ) and soot-black carbon ( soot-BC ) have been associated with asthma exacerbations , there is limited evidence on whether these pollutants are associated with the new development of asthma or allergy among young inner city children .
We hypothesized that childhood exposure to PM(2.5) and the soot-BC component would be associated with the report of new wheeze and development of seroatopy in an inner city birth cohort .
METHODS As part of the research being conducted by the Columbia Center of Children's Environmental Health ( CCCEH ) birth cohort study in New York City , two-week integrated residential monitoring of PM(2.5) , soot-BC ( based on a multi-wavelength integrating sphere method ) , and modified absorption coefficient ( Abs* ; based on the smoke stain reflectometer ) was conducted between October 2005 and May 2011 for 408 children at ages 5-6 years old .
Residential monitoring was repeated 6 months later ( n=262 ) to capture seasonal variability .
New wheeze was identified through the International Study of Asthma and Allergies in Childhood ( ISAAC ) questionnaires during up to 3 years of follow-up and compared to a reference group that reported never wheeze , remitted wheeze , or persistent wheeze .
Specific immunoglobulin ( Ig ) E against cockroach , mouse , cat , and dust mite and total IgE levels was measured in sera at ages 5 and 7 years .
RESULTS PM(2.5) , soot-BC , and Abs* measured at the first visit were correlated moderately with those at the second visit ( Pearson r>0.44 ) .
Using logistic regression models , a positive association between PM(2.5) and new wheeze was found with adjusted odds ratio [ 95% confidence intervals ] of 1.51 [ 1.05-2.16 ] per interquartile range ( IQR ) .
Positive but non-significant association was found between the development of new wheeze and soot-BC and ( OR 1.40 [ 0.96-2.05] ) , and Abs* ( OR 1.57 [ 0.91-2.68] ) ; Significantly positive associations were found between air pollutant measurements and new wheeze when restricting to those participants with repeat home indoor measurements 6 months apart .
Associations between pollutants and IgE levels were not detected .
CONCLUSIONS Our findings suggest that childhood exposure to indoor air pollution , much of which penetrated readily from outdoor sources , may contribute to the development of wheeze symptoms among children ages 5 to 7 years .
