The variability of trihalomethane ( THM ) levels in drinking water raises the question of whether or not short-term variations ( within-day ) should be accounted for when assessing exposure to contaminants suspected of being carcinogenic and reprotoxic agents .
The purpose of this study was to determine the magnitude of the impact on predicted biological levels of THMs ( internal doses ) exerted by within-day variations of THMs in drinking water .
A database extracted from a campaign in the Québec City distribution system served to produce 81 , 79 and 64 concentration profiles for the three most abundant THMs , namely chloroform ( TCM ) , dichlorobromomethane ( DCBM ) and chlorodibromomethane ( CDBM ) , respectively .
Using a physiologically based toxicokinetic modeling approach , we simulated exposures ( 1.5\u2009l water per day and a 10-min shower ) based on each of these profiles and predicted , for 2000 individuals ( Monte-Carlo simulations ) , maximum blood concentrations ( Cmax ) , areas under the time versus blood concentrations curve ( 24\u2009h-AUCcv ) and total absorbed doses ( ADs ) .
Three different hypotheses were tested : [ A ] assuming a constant THM concentration in water ( e.g. , mean value of a day ) ; [ B ] accounting for within-day variations in THM levels ; and [ C ] a worst-case scenario assuming within-day variations and showering while THM levels were maximal .
For each exposure profile , exposure indicator and individual , we calculated the ratios of values obtained according to each hypothesis ( e.g. , CmaxB/CmaxA and CmaxC/CmaxA ) and the values corresponding to the 5th and 95th percentiles of these ratios .
The closer these percentiles are to the value of 1 , the smaller the error associated with assuming constant THM concentrations rather than their actual variability .
Results showed that the minimal gap between these percentiles was TCM-AD(B)/TCM-AD(A) ( 5th=0.91 ; 95th=1.09 ) , whereas the maximal gap was CDBM-Cmax(C)/CDBM-Cmax(A) ( 5th=0.50 ; 95th=3.40 ) .
Overall , TCM and ADs were the less affected ( TCM<DCBM<CDBM and AD<AUCcv<Cmax ) when accounting for within-day variations in water levels .
