Health impact of air pollution to children was studied over the last twenty years in heavily polluted parts of the Czech Republic during .
The research program ( Teplice Program ) analyzed these effects in the polluted district Teplice ( North Bohemia ) and control district Prachatice ( Southern Bohemia ) .
Study of pregnancy outcomes for newborns delivered between 1994 and 1998 demonstrated that increase in intrauterine growth retardation ( IUGR ) was associated with PM10 and c-PAHs exposure ( carcinogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons ) in the first month of gestation .
Morbidity was followed in the cohort of newborns ( N=1492 ) up to the age of 10years .
Coal combustion in homes was associated with increased incidence of lower respiratory track illness and impaired early childhood skeletal growth up to the age of 3years .
In preschool children , we observed the effect of increased concentrations of PM2.5 and PAHs on development of bronchitis .
The Northern Moravia Region ( Silesia ) is characterized by high concentrations of c-PAHs due to industrial air pollution .
Exposure to B[a]P ( benzo[a]pyrene ) in Ostrava-Radvanice is the highest in the EU .
Children from this part of the city of Ostrava suffered higher incidence of acute respiratory diseases in the first year of life .
Gene expression profiles in leukocytes of asthmatic children compared to children without asthma were evaluated in groups from Ostrava-Radvanice and Prachatice .
The results suggest the distinct molecular phenotype of asthma bronchiale in children living in polluted Ostrava region compared to children living in Prachatice .
The effect of exposure to air pollution to biomarkers in newborns was analyzed in Prague vs. Ceske Budejovice , two locations with different levels of pollution in winter season .
B[a]P concentrations were higher in Ceske Budejovice .
DNA adducts and micronuclei were also elevated in cord blood in Ceske Budejovice in comparison to Prague .
Study of gene expression profiles in the cord blood showed differential expression of 104 genes .
Specifically , biological processes related to immune and defense response were down-regulated in Ceske Budejovice .
Our studies demonstrate that air pollution significantly affect child health .
Especially noticeable is the increase of respiratory morbidity .
With the development of molecular epidemiology , we can further evaluate the health risk of air pollution using biomarkers .
