Women and children in developing countries are often exposed to high levels of air pollution including polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons ( PAHs ) , which may negatively impact their health , due to household combustion of biomass fuel for cooking and heating .
We compared creatinine adjusted hydroxy-PAH ( OH-PAH ) concentrations in pregnant women in Trujillo , Peru who cook with wood to levels measured in those who cook with kerosene , liquefied petroleum gas or a combination of fuels .
Seventy-nine women were recruited for the study between May and July 2004 in the first trimester of their pregnancy .
Urine samples were collected from the subjects in the first , second and third trimesters for OH-PAH analyses .
The concentrations of the OH-PAHs were compared across the type of fuel used for cooking and pregnancy trimesters .
The relationships between OH-PAHs levels in the first trimester and concurrently measured personal exposures to PM\u2082.\u2085 , carbon monoxide and nitrogen dioxide together with their indoor and outdoor air concentrations were also investigated .
Women cooking with wood or kerosene had the highest creatinine adjusted OH-PAH concentrations compared with those using gas , coal briquette or a combination of fuels .
Concentrations of creatinine adjusted 2-hydroxy-fluorene , 3-hydroxy-fluorene , 1-hydroxy-fluorene , 2-hydroxy-phenanthrene and 4-hydroxy-phenanthrene were significantly higher ( p<0.05 ) in women who used wood or kerosene alone compared with women who used liquefied petroleum gas ( LPG ) , coal briquette or a combination of fuels .
An increase in the concentrations of creatinine adjusted 9-hydroxy-fluorene , 1-hydroxy-phenanthrene , 2-hydroxy-phenanthrene , 4-hydroxy-phenanthrene and 1-hydroxy-pyrene in the third trimesters was also observed .
Weak positive correlation ( Spearman correlation coefficient , \u03c1<0.4 ; p<0.05 ) was observed between all first trimester creatinine adjusted OH-PAHs and indoor ( kitchen and living room ) , and personal 48-h TWA PM\u2082.\u2085 .
Women who cooked exclusively with wood or kerosene had higher creatinine adjusted OH-PAH levels in their urine samples compared to women who cooked with LPG or coal briquette .
