Hydroxybenzoic acid esters ( parabens ) are used as preservatives in foods , cosmetics , and pharmaceuticals , which results in the exposure of humans to these compounds .
Parabens and its metabolite , p-hydroxybenzoic acid ( p-HB ) are excreted from urine in free and conjugated forms .
In this study , free and total forms ( free plus conjugated ) of parabens and their common metabolite , p-HB , were measured in urine samples collected from U.S. children ( n = 40 ) , Chinese children ( n = 70 ) , and Chinese adults ( n = 26 ) .
The median concentrations of the sum of 6 parabens ( \u03a3parabens ) in urine from U.S. and Chinese children were 54.6 and 10.1 ng/mL , respectively .
The median concentration of urinary parabens measured for Chinese adults was 33.2 ng/mL , which was lower than that reported for U.S. adults .
Elevated concentrations of parabens ( 1000-10,000 ng/mL ) were found in urine from some Chinese adult females .
Parabens were present predominantly ( >90% ) as conjugated species in urine .
Among the six parabens analyzed , methyl paraben ( MeP ) and propyl paraben ( PrP ) were the predominant compounds , which accounted for 57-98% and 1.4-12% , respectively , of the total concentrations .
A significant positive correlation was found between the concentrations of MeP and PrP .
The geometric mean ( GM ) concentration of p-HB was 1380 and 2370 ng/mL for Chinese children and adults , respectively .
The GM concentrations of p-HB in urine from U.S. children were 752 ng/mL for girls and 628 ng/mL for boys , which were 2-3 times lower than the concentrations determined for Chinese children .
There was a significant difference in the ratios of concentrations of \u03a3parabens and p-HB between demographic groups , which suggested the existence of various exposure routes to parabens .
Based on the concentrations of urinary parabens and p-HB , the daily intake ( DI ) of MeP and PrP was estimated .
The GM DI(MeP) estimated for Chinese children was 0.5-0.7 mg/day , which was similar to those determined for U.S. children .
The GM DI(PrP) ( 0.2-0.5 mg/day ) estimated for Chinese children was 20- to 50-fold higher than the value determined for U.S. children ( 0.01 mg/day ) .
The highest exposure to parabens was found for Chinese adult females , with GM DI(MeP) and DI(PrP) of 5.9 and 1.2 mg/day , respectively .
Elevated exposure to PrP was found in some Chinese adult females ( 27 mg/day ) and children ( 11 mg/day ) .
