BACKGROUND International studies suggest that low dose prenatal methylmercury exposure ( >29 nmol/L ) has long-term adverse neurocognitive effects .
There is evidence that the majority of children in Hong Kong exceed this level as a result of high fish consumption of mothers during pregnancy .
OBJECTIVE To study whether there are any associations between low-dose prenatal methylmercury exposure and neurocognitive outcomes in Hong Kong children .
MATERIALS AND METHODS All 1057 children from the original birth cohort were eligible for entry into the study , except children with conditions that would affect neurocognitive development , but were unrelated to methylmercury exposure .
Subjects were assessed by a wide panel of tests covering a broad range of neurocognitive functions : Hong Kong Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children ( HK-WISC ) , Hong Kong List Learning Test ( HKLLT ) , Tests of Everyday Attention for Children ( TEACH ) , Boston Naming Test , and Grooved Pegboard Test .
RESULTS 608 subjects were recruited ( median age 8.2 years , IQR 7.3 , 8.8 ; 53.9% boys ) .
After correction by confounders including child age and sex , multivariate analysis showed that cord blood mercury concentration was significantly associated with three subtests : Picture Arrangement of HK-WISC ( coefficient -0.944 , P=0.049 ) and Short and Long Delay Recall Difference of the HKLLT ( coefficient -1.087 , P=0.007 and coefficient -1.161 , P=0.005 , respectively ) , i.e. , performance worsened with increasing prenatal methylmercury exposure in these subtests .
CONCLUSIONS Small , but statistically significant adverse associations between prenatal methylmercury exposure and long-term neurocognitive effects ( a visual sequencing task and retention ability of verbal memory ) were found in our study .
These effects are compatible with findings of studies with higher prenatal methylmercury exposure levels and suggest that safe strategies to further reduce exposure levels in Hong Kong are desirable .
