BACKGROUND Phthalates have antiandrogenic effects and may disrupt lipid and carbohydrate metabolism .
Racial/ethnic subpopulations have been documented to have varying urinary phthalate concentrations and prevalences of childhood obesity .
OBJECTIVE We examined associations between urinary phthalate metabolites and body mass outcomes in a nationally representative sample of U.S. children and adolescents .
METHODS We performed stratified and whole-sample cross-sectional analyses of 2,884 children 6-19 years of age who participated in the 2003-2008 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey .
Multivariable linear and logistic analyses of body mass index z-score , overweight , and obesity were performed against molar concentrations of low-molecular-weight ( LMW ) , high-molecular-weight ( HMW ) , and di-2-ethylhexylphthalate ( DEHP ) metabolites , controlling for sex , television watching , caregiver education , caloric intake , poverty-income ratio , race/ethnicity , serum cotinine , and age group .
We used sensitivity analysis to examine robustness of results to removing sample weighting , normalizing phthalate concentrations for molecular weight , and examining different dietary intake covariates .
RESULTS In stratified , multivariable models , each log unit ( roughly 3-fold ) increase in LMW metabolites was associated with 21% and 22% increases in odds ( 95% CI : 1.05-1.39 and 1.07-1.39 , respectively ) of overweight and obesity , and a 0.090-SD unit increase in BMI z-score ( 95% CI : 0.003-0.18 ) , among non-Hispanic blacks .
Significant associations were not identified in any other racial/ethnic subgroup or in the study sample as a whole after controlling for potential confounders , associations were not significant for HMW or DEHP metabolites , and results did not change substantially with sensitivity analysis .
CONCLUSIONS We identified a race/ethnicity-specific association of phthalates with childhood obesity in a nationally representative sample .
Further study is needed to corroborate the association and evaluate genetic/epigenomic predisposition and/or increased phthalate exposure as possible explanations for differences among racial/ethnic subgroups .
