Traffic congestion increases vehicle emissions and degrades ambient air quality , and recent studies have shown excess morbidity and mortality for drivers , commuters and individuals living near major roadways .
Presently , our understanding of the air pollution impacts from congestion on roads is very limited .
This study demonstrates an approach to characterize risks of traffic for on- and near-road populations .
Simulation modeling was used to estimate on- and near-road NO2 concentrations and health risks for freeway and arterial scenarios attributable to traffic for different traffic volumes during rush hour periods .
The modeling used emission factors from two different models ( Comprehensive Modal Emissions Model and Motor Vehicle Emissions Factor Model version 6.2 ) , an empirical traffic speed-volume relationship , the California Line Source Dispersion Model , an empirical NO2-NOx relationship , estimated travel time changes during congestion , and concentration-response relationships from the literature , which give emergency doctor visits , hospital admissions and mortality attributed to NO2 exposure .
An incremental analysis , which expresses the change in health risks for small increases in traffic volume , showed non-linear effects .
For a freeway , " U " shaped trends of incremental risks were predicted for on-road populations , and incremental risks are flat at low traffic volumes for near-road populations .
For an arterial road , incremental risks increased sharply for both on- and near-road populations as traffic increased .
These patterns result from changes in emission factors , the NO2-NOx relationship , the travel delay for the on-road population , and the extended duration of rush hour for the near-road population .
This study suggests that health risks from congestion are potentially significant , and that additional traffic can significantly increase risks , depending on the type of road and other factors .
Further , evaluations of risk associated with congestion must consider travel time , the duration of rush-hour , congestion-specific emission estimates , and uncertainties .
