Using a case-crossover study design and conditional logistic regression , we compared the relative odds of transmural ( full-wall ) myocardial infarction ( MI ) calculated using exposure surrogates that account for human activity patterns and the indoor transport of ambient PM(2.5) with those calculated using central-site PM(2.5) concentrations to estimate exposure to PM(2.5) of outdoor origin ( exposure to ambient PM(2.5) ) .
Because variability in human activity and indoor PM(2.5) transport contributes exposure error in epidemiologic analyses when central-site concentrations are used as exposure surrogates , we refer to surrogates that account for this variability as " refined " surrogates .
As an alternative analysis , we evaluated whether the relative odds of transmural MI associated with increases in ambient PM(2.5) is modified by residential air exchange rate ( AER ) , a variable that influences the fraction of ambient PM(2.5) that penetrates and persists indoors .
Use of refined exposure surrogates did not result in larger health effect estimates ( ORs=1.10-1.11 with each interquartile range ( IQR ) increase ) , narrower confidence intervals , or better model fits compared with the analysis that used central-site PM(2.5) .
We did observe evidence for heterogeneity in the relative odds of transmural MI with residential AER ( effect-modification ) , with residents of homes with higher AERs having larger ORs than homes in lower AER tertiles .
For the level of exposure-estimate refinement considered here , our findings add support to the use of central-site PM(2.5) concentrations for epidemiological studies that use similar case-crossover study designs .
In such designs , each subject serves as his or her own matched control .
Thus , exposure error related to factors that vary spatially or across subjects should only minimally impact effect estimates .
These findings also illustrate that variability in factors that influence the fraction of ambient PM(2.5) in indoor air ( e.g. , AER ) could possibly bias health effect estimates in study designs for which a spatiotemporal comparison of exposure effects across subjects is conducted .
