Epidemiological studies frequently use central site concentrations as surrogates of exposure to air pollutants .
Variability in air pollutant infiltration due to differential air exchange rates ( AERs ) is potentially a major factor affecting the relationship between central site concentrations and actual exposure , and may thus influence observed health risk estimates .
In this analysis , we examined AER as an effect modifier of associations between several urban air pollutants and corresponding emergency department ( ED ) visits for asthma and wheeze during a 4-year study period ( January 1999-December 2002 ) for a 186 ZIP code area in metro Atlanta .
We found positive associations for the interaction between AER and pollution on asthma ED visits for both carbon monoxide ( CO ) and nitrogen oxides ( NO(x) ) , indicating significant or near-significant effect modification by AER on the pollutant risk-ratio estimates .
In contrast , the interaction term between particulate matter ( PM)(2.5 ) and AER on asthma ED visits was negative and significant .
However , alternative distributional tertile analyses showed PM(2.5) and AER epidemiological model results to be similar to those found for NOx and CO ( namely , increasing risk ratios ( RRs ) with increasing AERs when ambient PM(2.5) concentrations were below the highest tertile of their distribution ) .
Despite the fact that ozone ( O(3) ) was a strong independent predictor of asthma ED visits in our main analysis , we found no O(3)-AER effect modification .
To our knowledge , our findings for CO , NOx , and PM(2.5) are the first to provide an indication of short-term ( i.e. , daily ) effect modification of multiple air pollution-related risk associations with daily changes in AER .
Although limited to one outcome category in a single large urban locale , the findings suggest that the use of relatively simple and easy-to-derive AER surrogates may reflect intraurban differences in short-term exposures to pollutants of ambient origin .
