The mitigation of pollution released to the environment originating from the industrial sector has been the aim of all policy-makers and its importance is evident if the adverse health effects on the world population are considered .
Although this concern is controversial , petroleum refinery has been linked to some adverse health effects for people living nearby .
Apart from home , school is the most important indoor environment for children and there is increasing concern about the school environment and its impact on health , also in developing countries where the prevalence of pollution is higher .
As most of the children spend more than 40% of their time in schools , it is critical to evaluate the pollution level in such environment .
In the metropolitan region of Curitiba , South Brazil , five schools nearby industries and highways with high density traffic , were selected to characterize the aerosol and gaseous compounds indoor and outdoor of the classrooms , during 2009-2011 .
Size segregated aerosol samples were collected for analyses of bulk and single particle elemental profiles .
They were analyzed by electron probe X-ray micro-analysis ( EPXMA ) , and by energy-dispersive X-ray fluorescence ( EDXRF ) , to investigate the elemental composition of individual particles and bulk samples .
The concentrations of benzene , toluene , ethylbenzene , and xylene ( BTEX ) ; NO2 ; SO2 ; acetic acid ; and formic acid were assessed indoor and outdoor using passive diffusion tubes .
BTEX were analyzed by GC-MS and other collected gasses by ion chromatography .
Individual exposition of BTEX was assessed by personal passive diffusion tubes .
Results are interpreted separately and as a whole with the specific aim of identifying compounds that could affect the health of the scholars .
In view of the chemical composition and size distribution of the aerosol particles , local deposition efficiencies in the children's respiratory systems were calculated , revealing the deposition of particles at extrathoracic , tracheobronchial and pulmonary levels .
