BACKGROUND Persons with underlying health conditions may be at higher risk for the short-term effects of air pollution .
We have extended our original mortality time series study in Montreal , Quebec , among persons 65 years of age and older , for an additional 10 years ( 1990-2003 ) to assess whether these associations persisted and to investigate new health conditions .
METHODS AND RESULTS We created subgroups of subjects diagnosed with major health conditions one year before death using billing and prescription data from the Quebec Health Insurance Plan .
We used parametric log-linear Poisson models within the distributed lag non-linear models framework , that were adjusted for long-term temporal trends and daily maximum temperature , for which we assessed associations with NO2 , O3 , CO , SO2 , and particles with aerodynamic diameters 2.5 \u03bcm in diameter or less ( PM2.5 ) .
We found positive associations between daily non-accidental mortality and all air pollutants but O3 ( e.g. , for a cumulative effect over a 3-day lag , with a mean percent change ( MPC ) in daily mortality of 1.90% [ 95% confidence interval : 0.73 , 3.08% ] for an increase of the interquartile range ( 17.56 \u03bcg m(-3) ) of NO2 ) .
Positive associations were found amongst persons having cardiovascular disease ( cumulative MPC for an increase equal to the interquartile range of NO2=2.67% ) , congestive heart failure ( MPC=3.46% ) , atrial fibrillation ( MPC=4.21% ) , diabetes ( MPC=3.45% ) , and diabetes and cardiovascular disease ( MPC=3.50% ) .
Associations in the warm season were also found for acute and chronic coronary artery disease , hypertension , and cancer .
There was no persuasive evidence to conclude that there were seasonal associations for cerebrovascular disease , acute lower respiratory disease ( defined within 2 months of death ) , airways disease , and diabetes and airways disease .
CONCLUSIONS These data indicate that individuals with certain health conditions , especially those with diabetes and cardiovascular disease , hypertension , atrial fibrillation , and cancer , may be susceptible to the short-term effects of air pollution .
