Human exposure to chemicals commonly encountered in our environment , like phthalates , is routinely assessed through urinary measurement of their metabolites .
A particular attention is given to the specific population groups , such as obese , for which the dietary intake of environmental chemicals is higher .
To evaluate the exposure to phthalates , nine phthalate metabolites ( PMs ) were analyzed in urine collected from obese individuals and a control population .
Obese individuals lost weight through either bariatric surgery or a conservative weight loss program with dietary and lifestyle counseling .
Urine samples were also collected from the obese individuals after 3 , 6 and 12months of weight loss .
Individual daily intakes of the corresponding phthalate diesters were estimated based on the urinary PM concentrations .
A high variability was recorded for the levels of each PM in both obese and control urine samples showing the exposure to high levels of PMs in specific subgroups .
The most important PM metabolite as percentage contribution to the total PM levels was mono-ethyl phthalate followed by the metabolites of di-butyl phthalate and di 2-ethyl-hexyl phthalate ( DEHP ) .
No differences in the PM levels and profiles between obese entering the program and controls were observed .
Although paralleled by a significant decrease of their weight , an increase in the urinary PM levels after 3 to 6months loss was seen .
Constant figures for the estimated phthalates daily intake were observed over the studied period , suggesting that besides food consumption , other human exposure sources to phthalates ( e.g. air , dust ) might be also important .
The weight loss treatment method followed by obese individuals influenced the correlations between PM levels , suggesting a change of the intake sources with time .
Except for few gender differences recorded between the urinary DEHP metabolites correlations , no other differences were observed for the urinary PM levels as a function of age , body mass index or waist circumference .
Linear regression analysis showed almost no significance of the relationship between measured urinary PMs and serum free thyroxine , thyroid-stimulating hormone ( TSH ) for all obese individuals participating to the study , while for the control samples , several PMs were significantly associated with the serum TSH levels .
