Fish and shellfish are an important source not only of toxic heavy metals , but also of essential elements in the diet .
In this study , levels of Cu , Mn , Se and Zn have been determined in fresh , canned and frozen fish and shellfish products .
A total of 485 samples of the 43 most frequently consumed fish and shellfish species in Andalusia ( Southern Spain ) were analyzed for essential elements content .
The potential human health risks for the consumers and the nutritional value of the products analyzed were assessed .
Furthermore , the mercury-selenium ratios and the selenium health benefit value ( Se-HBVs ) were calculated .
The highest concentrations of Cu were found in crustaceans species ( shrimp and prawn ) as they have hemocyanin ( a copper-containing protein ) that functions as an oxygen-transport molecule .
Mn levels were higher in canned bivalve molluscs , such as cockle and clam , and in fresh common sole .
Concerning Se , two fresh predatory fish species ( tuna and swordfish ) presented the most remarkable concentrations of this element .
The highest concentration of the essential metals analysed was found for Zn , especially in fresh and canned mussels .
All the species analyzed showed beneficial Hg:Se ratios and Se-HBVs , except for the shark species ( blue shark and cat shark ) and gilt-head bream because of their high Hg levels and low Se content , respectively .
Nevertheless , the biomagnification usually observed in hazardous metals such as Hg would not occur for the essential elements measured in predatory species .
The estimated daily intakes of the elements studied represented very low percentages of their reference values , ranging from 0.1% ( Se ) to 3.9% ( Cu ) for person weighting 60 kg , so the intake of these elements through fish and shellfish would not pose any risk for the average consumer .
Moreover , the contribution of fish and shellfish products to the recommended daily allowances and adequate intakes of these mineral elements ranges from 2.5% ( Mn ) to 25.4% ( Se ) .
