Indoor handling of large amounts of plant materials occurs in different occupational settings including greenhouses and causes exposure to bioaerosols .
The bioaerosol components fungi , \u03b2-glucan , bacteria and endotoxin are involved in different airway symptoms and health effects can be dose-dependent .
Therefore , there is a persistent need to reduce exposure .
The aims of this study were to identify tasks causing exposure and to evaluate preventive measures aimed at reducing exposure of greenhouse workers to bioaerosols , and to study factors affecting the exposure .
We have focused on different exposure scenarios ; one with high short-term exposure found during clearing of old cucumber plants ; the other with long-term , mid-level exposure found during tomato picking , leaf nipping , stringing up tomato plants , and packaging of cucumbers .
Clearing of non-dried cucumber plants compared with clearing of dried cucumber plants significantly reduced the exposure to dust , endotoxin , bacteria , fungal spores and \u03b2-glucan .
More endotoxin and fungi are emitted and more of the emitted particles were of respirable size if the leaves were dried .
Along the cucumber packaging line , exposure levels were highly specific to each personal subtask .
The subtask ' unloading of cucumbers ' was the source of exposure making task ventilation or shielding of the process a possibility .
Elimination of leaf debris on the floor reduced the exposure to fungi significantly .
However , leaf debris on the floor did not contribute significantly to the exposure to dust , endotoxin and bacteria .
Furthermore , to eliminate leaf debris , it had to be cleared away and this was associated with a higher exposure to dust and endotoxin .
The age of the plants affected the exposure level to bioaerosols with higher exposures from old plants .
In conclusion , different tasks and subtasks cause very different exposure levels .
It is possible to reduce exposure by identifying subtasks causing the exposure and by modifying work processes , e.g. , not drying out of plants .
