BACKGROUND Workers on coke oven plants may be exposed to potentially carcinogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons ( PAHs ) , particularly during work on the ovens tops .
Two cohorts , employees of National Smokeless Fuels ( NSF ) and the British Steel Corporation ( BSC ) totalling more than 6,600 British coke plant workers employed in 1967 , had been followed up to mid-1987 for mortality .
Previous analyses suggested an excess in lung cancer risk of around 25% , or less when compared with Social Class IV ( 'partly skilled').Analyses based on internal comparisons within the cohorts identified statistical associations with estimates of individual exposures , up to the start of follow-up , to benzene-soluble materials ( BSM ) , widely used as a metric for mixtures of PAHs .
Some associations were also found with times spent in certain coke ovens jobs with specific exposure scenarios , but results were not consistent across the two cohorts and limitations in the exposure estimates were noted .
The present study was designed to reanalyse the existing data on lung cancer mortality , incorporating revised and improved exposure estimates to BSM and to benzo[a]pyrene ( B[a]P ) , including increments during the follow-up and a lag for latency .
METHODS Mean annual average concentrations of both BSM and B[a]P were estimated by analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) from concentration measurements at all NSF and six BSC plants , and summarised by job and plant , with a temporal trend ( for the BSM only ) .
These were combined with subjects ' work histories , to produce exposure estimates in each year of follow-up , with a 10-year lag to allow for latency .
Exposures to BSM and to B[a]P were sufficiently uncorrelated to permit analysis in relation to each variable separately.Lung cancer death risks during the follow-up were analysed in relation to the estimated time-dependent exposures , both continuous and grouped , using Cox regression models , with adjustment for age .
RESULTS Changing the exposure estimates changed the estimated relative risks compared with earlier results , but the new analyses showed no significant trends with continuous measures of exposure to either BSM or B[a]P , nor with time spent on ovens tops .
Analyses with grouped exposures showed mixed results .
Across all BSC plants , the relative risk coefficient for working 5 or more years on ovens tops , where the exposures were highest , was 1.81 , which was statistically significant .
However , results for those with 0-5 years on ovens tops did not suggest a trend ; the evidence for an underlying relationship was thus suggestive but not strong .
CONCLUSIONS The new results are in line with previous findings ; they show some signs consistent with an effect of coke ovens work on lung cancer risk , especially on ovens tops , but the preponderant absence of significant results , and the inconsistencies between results for NSF and BSC , highlight how little evidence there is in these data of any effect .
