OBJECTIVE To assess health risks associated with inhalation exposure to formaldehyde and benzene mainly emitted from building and decoration materials in newly remodeled indoor spaces in Beijing .
METHODS We tested the formaldehyde and benzene concentrations in indoor air of 410 dwellings and 451 offices remodeled within the past year , in which the occupants had health concerns about indoor air quality .
To assess non-carcinogenic health risks , we compared the data to the health guidelines in China and USA , respectively .
To assess carcinogenic health risks , we first modeled indoor personal exposure to formaldehyde and benzene using the concentration data , and then estimated the associated cancer risks by multiplying the indoor personal exposure by the Inhalation Unit Risk values ( IURs ) provided by the U.S. EPA Integrated Risk Information System ( U.S .
EPA IRIS ) and the California Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment ( OEHHA ) , respectively .
RESULTS ( 1 ) The indoor formaldehyde concentrations of 85% dwellings and 67% offices were above the acute Reference Exposure Level ( REL ) recommended by the OEHHA and the concentrations of all tested buildings were above the chronic REL recommended by the OEHHA ; ( 2 ) The indoor benzene concentrations of 12% dwellings and 32% offices exceeded the reference concentration ( RfC ) recommended by the U.S. EPA IRIS ; ( 3 ) The median cancer risks from indoor exposure to formaldehyde and benzene were 1,150 and 106 per million ( based on U.S. EPA IRIS IURs ) , 531 and 394 per million ( based on OEHHA IURs ) .
CONCLUSIONS In the tested buildings , formaldehyde exposure may pose acute and chronic non-carcinogenic health risks to the occupants , whereas benzene exposure may pose chronic non-carcinogenic risks to the occupants .
Exposure to both compounds is associated with significant carcinogenic risks .
Improvement in ventilation , establishment of volatile organic compounds ( VOCs ) emission labeling systems for decorating and refurbishing materials are recommended to reduce indoor VOCs exposure .
