Background : Polyfluoroalkyl chemicals ( PFCs ) such as perfluorooctane sulfonate ( PFOS ) and perfluorooctanoate ( PFOA ) have been associated with early menopause .
However , previous cross-sectional studies have lacked adequate data to investigate possible reverse causality ( i.e. , higher serum concentrations due to decreased excretion after menopause).Objectives : We investigated the association between PFOS , PFOA , perfluorononanoate ( PFNA ) , and perfluorohexane sulfonate ( PFHxS ) and age at natural menopause among women 20-65 years of age in NHANES ( National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey).Methods : We used proportional hazard models to estimate hazard ratios ( HRs ) for the onset of natural menopause as a function of age and serum PFC levels , and to investigate reverse causation by estimating associations between PFC levels and the rate of hysterectomy .
We also used multivariable linear regression to determine whether time since menopause predicted serum PFC levels.Results : After adjusting for age at survey , race/ethnicity , education , ever smoking , and parity , women with higher levels of PFCs had earlier menopause than did women with the lowest PFC levels .
We observed a monotonic association with PFHxS : The HR was 1.42 ( 95% CI : 1.08 , 1.87 ) for serum concentrations in tertile 2 versus tertile 1 , and 1.70 ( 95% CI : 1.36 , 2.12 ) for tertile 3 versus tertile 1 .
We also found evidence of reverse causation : PFCs were positively associated with rate of hysterectomy , and time since natural menopause was positively associated with serum PFCs.Conclusions : Our \ufb01ndings suggest a positive association between PFCs and menopause ; however , at least part of the association may be due to reverse causation .
Regardless of underlying cause , women appear to have higher PFC concentrations after menopause.Citation : Taylor KW , Hoffman K , Thayer KA , Daniels JL. 2014 .
Polyfluoroalkyl chemicals and menopause among women 20-65 years of age ( NHANES ) .
Environ Health Perspect 122:145-150;\u2002http://dx.doi.org.proxy.kib.ki.se/10.1289/ehp.1306707 .
