Background : Because human exposure to persistent organic pollutants ( POPs ) occurs mainly through ingestion of contaminated food , regulatory bodies issue dietary consumption advisories to describe safe intake levels for food items of concern , particularly fish.Objectives : Our study goal was to estimate the effectiveness of fish consumption advisories in reducing exposure of infants and children to POPs.Methods : We used the time-variant mechanistic model CoZMoMAN to estimate and compare prenatal , postnatal , and childhood exposure to polychlorinated biphenyl congener PCB-153 under different scenarios of maternal guideline adherence for both hypothetical constant and realistic time-variant chemical emissions .
The scenarios differed in terms of length of compliance ( 1 vs. 5 years ) , extent of fish substitution ( all vs. half ) , and replacement diet ( uncontaminated produce vs. beef ) .
We also estimated potential exposure reductions for a range of theoretical chemicals to explore how guideline effectiveness varies with a chemical's partitioning and degradation properties.Results : When assuming realistic time periods of advisory compliance , our findings suggest that temporarily eliminating or reducing maternal fish consumption is largely ineffective in reducing pre- and postnatal exposure to substances with long elimination half-lives in humans , especially during periods of decreasing environmental emissions .
Substituting fish with beef may actually result in higher exposure to certain groups of environmental contaminants .
On the other hand , advisories may be highly effective in reducing exposure to substances with elimination half-lives in humans shorter than the length of compliance.Conclusions : Our model estimates suggest that fish consumption advisories are unlikely to be effective in reducing prenatal , postnatal , and childhood exposures to compounds with long elimination half-lives in humans.Citation : Binnington MJ , Quinn CL , McLachlan MS , Wania F. 2014 .
Evaluating the effectiveness of fish consumption advisories : modeling prenatal , postnatal , and childhood exposures to persistent organic pollutants .
Environ Health Perspect 122:178-186;\u2002http://dx.doi.org.proxy.kib.ki.se/10.1289/ehp.1206380 .
