Benzene is a well-established hematotoxin .
However , reports of its effects on specific blood cells have been somewhat inconsistent and the relative toxicity of benzene metabolites on peripheral blood cells in humans has not been evaluated .
We compared hematologic outcomes in a cross-sectional study of 44 workers heavily exposed to benzene ( median : 31 parts permillion [ ppm ] as an 8-hr time-weighted average [ TWA ] and 44 age and gender-matched unexposed controls from Shanghai , China .
All hematologic parameters ( total white blood cells [ WBC ] , absolute lymphocyte count , platelets , red blood cells , and hematocrit ) were decreased among exposed workers compared to controls , with the exception of the red blood cell mean corpuscular volume ( MCV ) , which was higher among exposed subjects .
In a subgroup of workers who were not exposed to more than 31 ppm benzene on any of 5 sampling days ( n = 11 , median 8 hr TWA = 7.6 ppm , range = 1-20 ppm ) , only the absolute lymphocyte count was significantly different between exposed workers ( mean [ sd]1.6 [ 0.4 ] x 10(3) mu L ) and controls ( 1.9 [ 0.4 ] x l0(3) uL , p = 0.03 ) .
Among exposed subjects , a dose response relationship with various measures of current benzene exposure ( i.e. , personal air monitoring , benzene metabolites in urine ) was present only for the total WBC count , the absolute lymphocyte count , and the MCV .
Correlations between benzene metabolites and hematologic parameters were generally similar , although hydroquinone was somewhat more strongly associated with a decrease in the absolute lymphocyte count , and catechol was more strongly associated with an increase in MCV .
Morphologic review of peripheral blood slides demonstrated an excess of red blood cell abnormalities ( i.e. , stomatocytes and target cells ) only in the most heavily exposed workers , with no differences in granulocyte , lymphocyte , or platelet morphology noted .
Although benzene can affect all the major peripheral blood elements , our results support the use of the absolute lymphocyte count as the most sensitive indicator of benzene-induced hematotoxicity .
