Respiratory function and immunological status were studied in 40 cocoa and 53 flour processing workers employed as packers in a confectionery industry and in 65 unexposed control workers in the same industry .
A high prevalence of chronic respiratory symptoms was recorded in exposed workers , varying from 5.0% to 30.0% in cocoa workers and from 5.7% to 28.3% in flour workers .
Occupational asthma was diagnosed in 2 ( 5% ) of the cocoa workers and in 3 ( 5.7% ) of the flour workers .
None of the control workers suffered from occupational asthma .
The prevalence of almost all chronic respiratory symptoms was significantly greater in cocoa and flour workers than in control workers .
There was also a high prevalence of acute symptoms that developed during the work shift , being highest for cough ( cocoa : 57.5% ; flour : 50.9% ) and eye irritation ( cocoa : 50.0% ; flour : 54.7% ) .
Significant across-shift reductions of ventilatory capacity were recorded in exposed workers , being largest for flow rates at 50% and the last 25% of the vital capacity on maximum expiratory flow-volume ( MEFV ) curves ( FEF50 , FEF75 ) .
The prevalence of positive skin tests for cocoa ( 60.2% ) was significantly higher than the prevalence of positive skin tests for flour ( 25.8% ) among the 93 exposed workers ( p < 0.05 ) .
Control workers had significantly lower prevalences of positive skin tests to cocoa ( 4.6% ) and flour ( 12.3% ) than exposed workers ( p < 0.01 ) .
Increased total serum IgE levels were found in 17.5% of cocoa and in 18.7% of flour workers ; none of the control workers had increased IgE levels .
Bronchoprovocation testing demonstrated significant decreases in lung function following inhalation of cocoa dust extract and flour dust in workers with respiratory symptoms and large across-shift reductions in lung function .
Dust concentrations in the working environment were higher than those recommended by Croatian standards .
These data suggest that workers employed in the processing of cocoa and flour may be at a high risk for the development of allergic sensitization and respiratory impairment .
