To determine the contaminants that should be studied further in the subsequent population-based study , a profile of Great Lakes ( GL ) sport fish contaminant residues were studied in human blood and urine specimens from 32 sport fish consumers from three Great Lakes : Lake Michigan ( n = 10 ) , Lake Huron ( n = 11 ) , and Lake Erie ( n = 11 ) .
Serum was analyzed for 8 polychlorinated dioxin congeners , 10 polychlorinated furan congeners , 4 coplanar and 32 other polychlorinated biphenyl ( PCB ) congeners , and 11 persistent chlorinated pesticides .
Whole blood was analyzed for mercury and lead .
Urine samples were analyzed for 10 nonpersistent pesticides ( or their metabolites ) and 5 metals .
One individual was excluded from statistical analysis because of an unusual exposure to selected analytes .
Overall , the sample ( n = 31 ) consumed , on average , 49 GL sport fish meals per year for a mean of 33 years .
On average , the general population in the GL basin consume 6 meals of GL sport fish per year .
The mean tissue levels of most persistent , bioaccumulative compounds also found in GL sport fish ranged from less than a twofold increase to that of PCB 126 , which was eight times the selected background levels found in the general population .
The overall mean total toxic equivalent for dioxins , furans , and coplanar PCBs were greater than selected background levels in the general population ( dioxins , 1.8 times ; furans , 2.4 times ; and coplanar PCBs , 9.6 times ) .
The nonpersistent pesticides and most metals were not identified in unusual concentrations .
A contaminant pattern among lake subgroups was evident .
Lake Erie sport fish consumers had consistently lower contaminant concentrations than consumers of sport fish from Lake Michigan and Huron .
These interlake differences are consistent with contaminant patterns seen in sport fish tissue from the respective lakes ; GL sport fish consumption was the most likely explanation for observed contaminant levels among this sample .
Frequent consumers of sport fish proved to be effective sentinels for identifying sport fish contaminants of concern .
In the larger study to follow , serum samples will be tested for PCBs ( congener specific and coplanar ) , DDE , dioxin , and furans .
