The immunologic effects of in utero exposure to polychlorinated biphenyls ( PCBs)/polychlorinated dibenzofurans ( PCDFs ) were evaluated in the Yucheng children in this study .
The study subjects consisted of 105 Yucheng children and 101 control children .
The Yucheng children were born , between July 1978 and June 1987 , to women who had exposed to high dose of PCBs/PCDFs through consumption of contaminated rice bran oil in 1978-1979 .
These children had been reported to have higher frequencies of bronchitis than their controls in the first six months of life , and higher frequencies of respiratory tract and ear infection in a 6-year follow-up .
The low resistance of the Yucheng children to infection suggested that their immune function was suppressed by the PCBs/PCDFs they had exposed to in utero .
In the summer and fall of 1995 , a thorough physical examination and blood draw were performed on the study children .
The Yucheng children were reported by their parents to have higher frequencies of influenza attacks than the control children during the six months prior to the examination .
The frequencies of other symptoms were similar between the two groups .
The serum levels of various immunoglobulins were similar between the two groups .
Fifty-one serum samples , 29 of Yucheng and 22 of control children , were available for cell-mediated immunologic analysis .
The percentages of various T cell markers , CD3 , CD4 , and CD8 , and B cell and NK cell markers were not different between the Yucheng and the control children .
No dose-response relationship was found between 27 Yucheng children's serum PCB/PCDF levels and any of their immunologic markers .
WE concluded that 16 years after the Yucheng incident , Yucheng children exposed to high dose of PCBs/PCDFs in utero did not show , with the serum immunologic marker analyses , suppressed immunity when compared to their controls .
To explain the consistent higher frequencies of upper respiratory tract infection in the Yucheng children , immune functional tests such as delayed hypersensitive skin reaction , in vitro lymphocyte proliferation , and antibody synthesis following immunization may be necessary .
